Voyage of the Shadowmoon is the title of the first book in the The Moonworlds Saga fantasy series by Sean McMullen. The novel was first published in New York in October, 2002.
Plot introduction
Voyage of the Shadowmoon follows the crew of the mysterious vessel named Shadowmoon, a spy vessel. Their task is to retrieve Silverdeath, an apocalyptic mechanism that has been hidden for decades. Unearthed by the ambitious Emperor Warsovran, Silverdeath annihilates an entire continent. The Shadowmoon's crew, some of whom are working for different parties, are trying to secure Silverdeath before it can be used again by any of a host of rulers who wish to abuse its destructive abilities.
Characters
Silverdeath 
When inert, Silverdeath is simply a suit of chainmail armor (albeit a striking one) that offers excellent protection, especially against etheric castings, but does little else. Once placed over a host, Silverdeath forms a silver shell around the wearer, making whatever repairs necessary (including replacing and mending body parts, and reverse aging) and obeys whoever placed it onto the host. The full repertoire of its powers are unclear, but the machine is coveted throughout the book for its ability to create "fire circles" over a target. When commanded to destroy a target, Silverdeath leaves its host (after warning its master that the "feat is at the limit" of its abilities) and floats high above its target, soon creating a huge explosion on the ground below, hot enough to melt stone and turn sand to glass. It stays above its target, creating fire circles that are twice the diameter of the previous circle in half the time (starting with the second circle, which occurs sixty-four days after the first) until either the circle's entire diameter is over water or more than half of its area is over water, after which the machine returns to its inert form and floats down to the ground just as it cools. Eventually, Silverdeath is destroyed when it is placed on Ninth, whose link to the distant world, Earth, drains Silverdeath's etheric energies.
Laron 
A vampyre from Earth, transferred to the body of a fourteen-year-old boy during an experiment. He has been alive for seven centuries and follows a strict chivalric code. Aboard the Shadowmoon, he has the role of medicar and navigator. He is an experienced sorcerer, and after losing his vampiric abilities (super strength, immortality, blood drinking) to Silverdeath, Laron falls back on his etheric abilities and his training from Roval for self-defence.
Roval 
A proficient warrior and sorcerer , Roval spends a lot of time apart from the Shadowmoon, attempting to spy on his enemies and win allies to his cause, which is destroying Silverdeath. He is in prison for a good portion of the book. He is friends with Laron and teaches him a specialized fighting technique when Laron loses his vampyric abilities.
Feran 
The mysterious boatmaster of the Shadowmoon, whose only interest seems to be women. While some of the crew suspect Feran to be more than he appears, it is not until after Feran becomes the master of Silverdeath that he reveals his true identity to be that of an ancient sorcerer who has waited decades to be in control of Silverdeath. He is predictable, especially when angry, and easy to anger, making him a poor owner of Silverdeath.
Druskarl 
The "eunuch king" who searches for Silverdeath with the aim of being made whole again by it. Druskarl ran away from kingship during a scandal with his wife, pretending to have died. He plans on returning to rule his kingdom once no longer a eunuch .
Velander 
A priestess who values logic and her integrity above all else. Despite this, she makes constant illogical decisions under the influence of anger and frustration, the most grievous of which was to go darkwalking without using the proper precautions and losing her body to a succubus . This experience, along with her observations of Laron for many months, slowly shape her into a new person.
Terikel 
A priestess of the Metrologan Order. She becomes the head of her order when much of it is annihilated by Silverdeath. This is to the disdain of some, particularly Velander, who believes Terikel's integrity to be questionable. Terikel is a dedicated and decisive leader, who nevertheless always seems to be a step behind.
Ninth 
An auton (a type of magical artificial intelligence) placed in Velander's body by Laron after Velander's soul is thought to have been killed darkwalking. The auton is emotionless and has no real purpose except as an anchor for communication between Laron and Eltee, a woman from Earth.
