The Act of Marriage: The Beauty of Sexual Love is a self-help book, written by Christian writers Tim and Beverly LaHaye.
Chapter summaries
Chapter 1: The Sanctity of Sex
This chapter sets out to convince the reader that sex is holy and sacred , not dirty—an attitude they have found to be prevalent among the couples they have counseled . They cite several examples in both the Old Testament and New Testament where intimate behavior between married persons is commended.
Chapter 2: What Lovemaking Means to a Man
In this chapter the authors set out five benefits that men derive from intimacy with their wives :
It satisfies his sex drive , which is usually greater than his wife's.
It boosts his self image .
It increases the love he feels for his wife and makes it less likely that he will engage in extramarital affairs .
It calms him down and makes him less prone to find fault with his family.
It provides one of the most exciting experiences of his life.
Overall, the chapter is concerned with convincing wives that it is okay for their husbands to want to have sex with them.
Chapter 3: What Lovemaking Means to a Woman
In this chapter the authors set out five benefits that women derive from intimacy with their husbands.
It fulfills her sense of womanhood .
It reassures her of her husband's love. They point out that a woman needs to feel companionship love , compassionate love , romantic love , and affectionate love from her husband before she will feel ready to accept passionate love .
It satisfies her sex drive.
It helps her to relax and to not be high-strung.
It is the ultimate experience when properly done.
Overall, the chapter is concerned with convincing husbands that women can and need to be sexually satisfied, too.
Chapter 4: Why God Created Sex
In this chapter the authors present five reasons that God created sex, in spite of how it is misused by many.
It is needed to propagate the human race.
It provides a married couple the means to give mutual pleasure.
It allows spouses to be fulfilled with each other and to be less tempted by other sexual opportunities .
The husband will have claim over his wife and the wife will have claim over her husband.
It creates a unique union and method of communication between two people that cannot be shared with anyone else.
Overall, the chapter is concerned with convincing couples that sex is a blessing from God, but that it should only be experienced within the bonds of marriage.
Chapter 5: Sex Education
This chapter explains the male and female sex organs and how they respond to sexual stimulation . Some counsel is given on how to avoid or reduce pain when breaking the hymen . Emphasis is placed on the clitoris as the seat of the female orgasm . The differences between male and female orgasms are also outlined.
Chapter 6: The Art of Lovemaking
This chapter outlines the basic steps taken during a lovemaking session. It includes preparations that should be taken, foreplay , the act itself , and the "afterglow" that follows completion of the act. They stress the importance of the husband waiting until his wife is fully aroused before entering her vagina and proceeding to orgasm. They recommend that a couple use their honeymoon for experimentation so that they can best learn how to please their partner. The importance of clitoral stimulation to achieve female orgasm is again stressed. Male and female sexual responses are again compared and a brief discussion of positions is given.
Chapter 7: For Men Only
This chapter gives eleven suggestions on how men can satisfy their wives.
Educate yourself on the female anatomy.
Learn to control your ejaculation so it does not happen prematurely .
Concentrate on the woman's satisfaction, not your own.
Remember what arouses a woman (companionship, compassionate, romantic, and affectionate love).
