How Many Miles to Babylon? is a novel by Irish writer Jennifer Johnston, first published in 1974.
Synopsis
The story is the complex tale of a friendship between two boys in Ireland prior to and during World War I . Alec, the son of Anglo-Irish parents grows up lonely and friendless on his parents' estate in Wicklow during the early years of the 20th century. His parents have a difficult relationship and it is stated that "their only meeting place was the child." He meets a local boy, Jerry, who shares his passion for horses. Alec's mother, who believes strongly in the class system of early twentieth century Ireland, discovers the friendship and forbids him to spend any more time with Jerry. Their friendship is thereafter conducted in private until the outbreak of the First World War . Jerry signs up as his father is already in the British Army and the King's Shilling would be of great benefit to his mother. Alec feels no compulsion to sign up until his mother tells Alec that his father Fredrick is not his biological father and in that moment he is so frustrated with his mother his compulsively signs up. In France the two friends are stationed together, but now divided by rank as well as class. Their friendship with Bennett plus their own continued friendship eventually leads them to a tragic end.
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
In 1982 it was adapted for television by the BBC, starring Daniel Day-Lewis as Alex and Christopher Fairbank as Jerry. [1]
In 2005 the actor and director Alan Stanford adapted the novel for stage and it was produced by Second Age Theatre Company and directed by David Parnell. The 2005 production starred Philip O'Sullivan as the father, Louis Lovett as Bennett, Sam Peter Corry as Alec and Fergal McElherron as Jerry.
In 2006 the show was revived for a three week run in the Helix Theatre with Ciaran Fitzgerald as Alec, George McMahon as Bennett and Ciaran O'Brien as Jerry.
The book featured as the BBC Radio Four 'Book at Bedtime' in April 2013.
