The Magic Faraway Tree is a children's novel by Enid Blyton, first published in 1943. It is the second book in the The Faraway Tree series of novels, in which Jo, Bessie and Fanny, the protagonists of the series, have their cousin Dick over to stay with them. They then introduce him to Silky, Moonface, Saucepan Man and all their other friends in the Magic Faraway Tree. In 2003 it was voted #66 in the BBC's Big Read poll to find the UK's favourite book. The book is also heavily referenced in the graphic novel V for Vendetta, in which the third book is called 'The Land of Do-as-you-please" and includes V reading The Magic Faraway Tree to Evey Hammond.
Lands In the Series
The Land of Topsy Turvy
This land is a peculiar place where everybody walks on their hands and everything is upside down. A policeman gets angry at Joe, so he puts a spell on Jo to turn him on his hands too.
The Land of Spells
There are many witches and wizards with spells in this land and Joe gets put back right side up, by a friendly old witch.
The Land of Dreams
Here everything that happens is very dream-like and unreal. The characters get stuck in this land because the Sandman throws sand in the children's eyes to make them sleep.
The Land of Do-As-You-Please
In this land, anybody can do what they want and the children have great fun. Joe gets to drive a train, and all of them get to wade in the ocean.
The Land of Toys
Saucepan man accidentally thinks of this land to be The Land of Goodies, so he gets imprisoned for stealing candy. Joe and the others rescue him from jail.
The Land of Goodies
This land is filled with free goodies such as cake and treacle pudding. Rick eats a knocker from one of the resident's houses, getting in trouble.
The Land of the Old Woman
Dame Washalot's friend, the old woman who lives in a shoe, comes down the faraway tree to live in Moonface's house. The children lure her back to her land, with Rick making up for his mistake in The Land of Goodies and saving his friends.
The Land of Magic Medicines
The children's mother is ill, so the children visit this land to buy her medicine.
The Land of Tempers
In this land everyone has a bad temper and if anyone loses their temper here, they will have to stay in the land forever.
The Land of Presents
A place full of presents, which the children go around picking up for each other and their parents.
Land of Birthdays*
Beth enjoys her best birthday ever in the Land of Birthdays.
Influences on anarchism
The Land of Do-As-You-Please has had an effected the philosophy of anarchism as a popular analogy within anarchism as it is seen to be very similar to the philosophy itself. This was represented in Alan Moore graphic novel V for Vendetta in which the main character known as V, wishes to destroy the totalitarian state, and create a place called The Land of Do-As-You-Please.
Modern alterations
The modern reprints have altered the names of the main characters. Jo is now Joe, Bessie is now Beth from the original Elizabeth. Dick and Fanny have been changed to Rick and Frannie, due to the modern sexual connotations of the original names.
