The Frog Princess is a children's novel by E. D. Baker, first published in 2002. The 2009 Disney film, The Princess and the Frog, is loosely based on this novel.
Plot summary
Emeralda (AKA Emma) is the only princess in Greater Greensward. But she is clumsy with everything, including the magic touch she inherited from the first Green Witch centuries back. One of her most distinct traits is her unique laugh, which sounds like a donkey's bray. When her mother says she has to marry the stuck-up Prince Jorge from East Aradia, her worst enemy, she runs off to the swamp where she meets Prince Eadric of Upper Montevista. The only problem is that he has been turned into a frog by the witch Mudine. Emma kisses him, trying to reverse the spell; instead, she turns into a frog herself. Emma and Eadric set off to find the witch that turned him into a frog and ask her to change them back. With what little magic Emma has learned from her Aunt Grassina, the current Green Witch, Emma tries to save Eadric and herself. On the journey they find out that the witch that changed Eadric has disappeared, so they go to Grassina for help. She tells them that they have to do several tasks in order to return to their normal state. While completing the tasks, Emma falls deeply in love with Eadric. When they once again assume their proper human shape, Eadric proposes to Emma.
Characters
Emma, aka Emeralda - The princess and heir of Greater Greensward, and a young witch who has not yet acquired full control over her magic
Eadric - The prince and heir of Upper Montevista
Grassina - The younger sister of Greater Greensward's queen, as well as the Green Witch. She is very close to her niece Emma
Chartreuse - The queen of Greater Greensward, and Emma's mother. She has always had a rocky relationship with her daughter
L'il - A bat who was held hostage at a witch's cabin. After Emma freed her, she decided to stay with Emma
Fang - A snake who was also held hostage at a witch's cabin. When Emma freed him, he offers to escort them back to the castle.
Reception and reviews
Diane Roback was mixed in her review for Publishers Weekly saying that "the tale occasionally offers peppy dialogue and some comical scenes--particularly as the newly transformed Emeralda adjusts to catching flies ("My eye-tongue coordination wasn't very good," she admits). Unfortunately, the plot doesn't make much of the magical elements (for example, the characters' encounters with a dragon and a nymph seem inconsequential), resulting in a disappointingly flat fantasy." [2]
Todd Morning was positive in his review for Booklist saying "the ending in this fairy tale –twisting first novel is rather like a Shakespearean comedy , with lots of disguises revealed. Unlike some takeoffs that revolve around one joke, this manages to be entertaining throughout, helped along by Emeralda’s amusing first person narration and the many witty lines." [3]
Nancy Menaldi-Scanlon in her review for School Library Journal thought that the vocabulary did not match the book's intended audience saying "The tale moves at a good pace, and, though the happy ending is predictable, the trials and tribulations that precede it are interesting. However, it's difficult to determine the book's audience. While the story would appeal to primary to intermediate grade girls, the vocabulary is rather sophisticated and seems to be more suited to young adults." [4]
Sequels
E.D. Baker followed The Frog Princess with more books in the series chronicling Emma and Eadric's adventures: Dragon's Breath (2005), Once Upon a Curse (2006), and No Place for Magic (2008), as well as a prequel, The Salamander Spell (2008).
There is also an epilogue series of the books about Emma and Eadrics' daughter, Millie. The titles for that series are The Dragon Princess, Dragon Kiss and the most recent, A Prince Among Frogs.
Other books by E.D. Baker
Dragon's Breath
