The Digger is a 24-page magazine in Glasgow, Scotland. It is published weekly, in an A5 newsletter format. In 2012, the magazine went from news print to glossy. The magazine was founded by James Cruickshank in 2004, and currently has eight full time staff members, of which five are accredited journalists; two are full time court reporters. The Digger also employs lawyers to legal the magazine every week. The magazine claims to have a circulation of up to 10,000 and serves 600 shops in the Greater Glasgow area. Sales fluctuate between 6,500 and 10,000 each week. The paper focuses on stories about local organised crime, and alleged corruption within Strathclyde Police and Glasgow City Council, sometimes also naming alleged local drug dealers and paedophiles. The paper was the subject of a BBC Scotland documentary in 2006. At one stage Cruickshank was banned from covering stories at Glasgow Sheriff Court. Two families behind a security company and a taxi company have been pursuing the magazine in the Court of Session for three years. There is no advertising but plans are in place to start media sales to try and cover escalating legal costs. Law firms Levy & McRae and Balfour and Manson regularly represent clients upset at news reports published in The Digger. The editor has complained to the Faculty of Advocates and the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission that some lawyers are abusing their powers when invoking contempt laws which cover the Press. A jury has never found the magazine guilty of defamation. An editor was found in Contempt of Court in 2006 after an article appeared claiming a social worker was allegedly profiting from being a foster parent of a prostitute. The article breached child protection laws, which prohibit identifying a child in foster care. Lord Brailsford has said he is a fan of The Digger and First Minister Alex Salmond has told colleagues he likes it. However, Justice Minister Kenny MacAskill has said he doesn't like it.
For the Australian alternative magazine, see The Digger (alternative magazine)
The Digger is a 24-page magazine in Glasgow , Scotland . It is published weekly, in an A5 newsletter format. In 2012, the magazine went from news print to glossy.
The magazine was founded by James Cruickshank in 2004, and currently has eight full-time staff members, of which five are accredited journalists; two are full-time court reporters. The Digger also employs lawyers to legal the magazine every week.
The magazine claims to have a circulation of up to 10,000 [1] and serves 600 shops in the Greater Glasgow area. Sales fluctuate between 6,500 and 10,000 each week.
The paper focuses on stories about local organised crime, and alleged corruption within Strathclyde Police and Glasgow City Council , sometimes also naming alleged local drug dealers and paedophiles. The paper was the subject of a BBC Scotland documentary in 2006. [2] At one stage Cruickshank was banned from covering stories at Glasgow Sheriff Court. [3] [4]
Two families behind a security company and a taxi company have been pursuing the magazine in the Court of Session for three years.
There is no advertising but plans are in place to start media sales to try and cover escalating legal costs. Law firms Levy & McRae and Balfour and Manson regularly represent clients upset at news reports published in The Digger.
The editor has complained to the Faculty of Advocates and the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission that some lawyers are abusing their powers when invoking contempt laws which cover the Press.
A jury has never found the magazine guilty of defamation. An editor was found in Contempt of Court in 2006 after an article appeared claiming a social worker was allegedly profiting from being a foster parent of a prostitute. The article breached child protection laws, which prohibit identifying a child in foster care.
