The Lost Slayer is a series of four novels written by Christopher Golden. It was later collected together in one omnibus paperback. Each was published by Pocket Books
Description
Buffy, Xander and Willow have found a weakened and insane Camazotz which they accidentally release from his magical chains. Willow figures out how to kill Camaztoz: with gold, through alchemy which can only be done if it's not used for personal gain. Willow is able to create a golden crossbow bolt and kill Camazotz with it. Meanwhile, Anna, the new Slayer, and Wesley try to reduce the vampire population though Wesley gets seriously injured. Now that Camazotz is dead, the Kakchiquels have lost all their power and are reduced to only regular vampire strength but there is still many, a whole army all loyal to Giles.
Shortly after, Willow, Xander, Oz and Buffy enter a room to find Angel suspended in mid-air with a stake protruding from his heart, and yet he still lives. Giles has imprisoned Angel here for the past five years when Angel went out searching for Buffy. The orb Angel is trapped in freezes his body in the moment before his death; if the spell is broken, Angel will instantly die. Giles finds them all and Buffy stays to fight while the others rush off to help the other troops. Buffy initially is hesitant as Giles plays on her emotions, but with the help of Angel, she finally breaks through it, fighting Giles with the same sword she once sent Angel to Hell with. Eventually Giles gets the sword, but Buffy tricks him into hitting the orb trapping Angel, injuring Giles and causing Angel to finally die. Buffy grabs the stake Giles killed Angel with and stakes Giles, finally killing him, despite him taking on his human face again to play on her emotions. Meanwhile, Willow and Buffy's other friends try to help in the main fight, but there are too many vampires and most of the Council operatives are dead, leaving only three left. Wesley is killed by Giles' second in command Jax, who goes to kill Anna, the other Slayer, but Xander sacrifices himself to save her, killing Jax. The grief of his death causes Willow to tap into all her power and destroy the vampire army by smashing the windows and uncovering them, exposing the vampires to sunlight. Unfortunately both Wesley and Xander die as well as does many of the Council operatives, but Giles and his army are dead and the world is saved.
Finally Willow figures out a spell to send Buffy back in time. Guided by Lucy Hanover , Buffy goes back to the day where she told Willow that she didn't need her help with Camaztoz. But this time she asks for help. As Buffy fights to free Giles she is backed up by her friends. Thanks to a timely distraction from Willow, Buffy saves Giles where she couldn't before and he never becomes a vampire and thus never the Vampire King. Willow binds Zotzilaha into a snowglobe, but not before they force to tell them where to find Camazotz who they go after. Buffy tries to have present-day Willow perform the alchemy spell before the final battle, but unlike her future self, she can't as she doesn't know the secret and is still unable to during the battle once she is asked to. Buffy and her friends defeat Camazotz's army, killing most of them before Buffy battles Camazotz who is somewhat weakened from an attack from Willow before. Desperate, he kills his remaining Kakchiquels, absorbing their power into himself and grows extremely powerful, easily beating Buffy. On the verge of defeat, Willow tries the alchemy spell again and manages to turn a stake to gold for Buffy to use. Catching Camazotz by surprise, Buffy stakes him through the heart with her golden stake, killing Camazotz and averting the future she visited completely. With Camazotz dead, Willow throws the golden stake overboard of the ship they were battling on and Buffy and her friends return home, with Buffy now possessing a new appreciation for her friends.
