Rage of Angels is a 1980 novel by Sidney Sheldon. The novel revolves around young attorney Jennifer Parker, as she rises as a successful lawyer after being framed for threatening the chief witness against a Mafia boss by mistakenly giving him a dead canary with a broken neck which in turn leads to a situation that promises to break Her life's dreams. As the story progresses, the protagonist is romantically torn between a famous politician, who helps her rise again and a Mafia boss, the man that framed her who later swears to destroy her after he comes to know of her affair with the politician that had short-lived though long enough to gift her a son.
978-0-446-35661-9
Rage of Angels is a novel by Sidney Sheldon published in 1980. The novel revolves around young attorney Jennifer Parker, as she rises as a successful lawyer after being framed for threatening the chief witness against a Mafia boss by mistakenly giving him a dead canary with a broken neck which in turn leads to a situation that promises to break Her life's dreams. As the story progresses, the protagonist is romantically torn between a famous politician, who helps her rise again and a Mafia boss, the man that framed her, swearing to destroy her after he finds out about her affair with the politician that had short-lived though long enough to gift her a son.
Plot summary
Jennifer is an Assistant District Attorney for the State of New York , New York County . A beautiful, inexperienced, criminal defense attorney , she foils a plot by Michael Moretti, the rising star of one of the most powerful organized crime families in America . Manhattan District Attorney Robert Di Silva, believing that Jennifer is truly responsible, fires her and vows to destroy her for her part in the fiasco with Michael Moretti.
Di Silva arranges for the young lawyer Adam Warner to meet Parker in an attempt to persuade him that she is truly responsible for the bribe. Upon meeting her Adam falls for Jennifer and realizes that she isn't guilty at all. With Adam's help Jennifer begins to rise again, meanwhile Moretti, inspired by her determination to succeed, decides he would like to induct her as the Family consigliere (a mafia lawyer).
Adam Warner, despite being married and groomed for the United States Senate , and with the possibility of a White House destination, can not help falling in love with Jennifer. When Adam tells Jennifer that his wife has asked for a divorce, Jennifer meets with Warner's wife, Mary Beth. Being so close to the Senate election, the two women decide it is best for Adam to wait until after the election. Mary Beth however sleeps with Adam one last time, in the process tricking him into impregnating her. Adam learns that his wife is pregnant, wins the election, and tells Jennifer that he truly loves her but they must end their affair. Jennifer having previously discovered that she too is pregnant and not wanting to hurt Adam, accepts, but doesn't reveal to him that she is carrying his child.
Jennifer gives birth to her son and names him Joshua Adam Parker. She keeps the birth a secret, allowing only Ken Bailey, her assistant, to become aware of her son. She then returns to her practice and soon makes headlines as a successful lawyer. Meanwhile, Michael constantly tries to spark friendship with Jennifer, which she rebuffs at every attempt, reminding him of his earlier tricks. Nevertheless, when her son is kidnapped by a criminal Jennifer is defending, she, in desperation, turns to Michael Moretti for help. After helping her, he seduces her and Jennifer becomes the Family consigliere . Through the twist of a series of events Jennifer's son Joshua dies due to a skiing accident. In the final chapters of the book Jennifer and Michael are being hunted down by the government. Michael misunderstands that Jennifer wasn't loyal to him and shoots her. Michael himself is killed in a cross firing when the FBI raid his house. Due to Adam Warner's position in the operation that was after the Mafia family, Jennifer Parker is saved. Adam goes on to become the President of the United States of America. The book ends with Jennifer watching him being sworn in as President on television.
Film version
In 1983, a made for TV film was produced, Sidney Sheldon's Rage of Angels starring Jaclyn Smith , Armand Assante and Ken Howard . It was followed by a sequel, Rage of Angels: The Story Continues in 1986.
In 1986 an uncredited Malayalam film version loosely based on the novel was released in India titled Rajavinte Makan with Mohanlal , Ambika , Ratheesh and Suresh Gopi in the lead roles. The movie went on to become a huge box office hit, and turned actor Mohan Lal into a superstar overnight. The film was remade in Tamil as 'Makkal en Pakkam' with Sathyaraj , Ambika, Rajesh , Nagesh , Raghuvaran . Kodi Rama Krishna made a movie with Rajasekhar ,Jeevitha and Prasad (after the movie he is called as Ahuthi Prasad) in lead roles named Ahuthi loosely based on the novel. It went on to become a huge hit and one of the successful movies for Rajasekhar.
