He Died with a Felafel in His Hand is a novel by Australian author John Birmingham, first published in 1994 by The Yellow Press. The story consists of a collection of colourful anecdotes about living in share houses in Brisbane and other cities in Australia with variously dubious housemates. The title refers to a deceased heroin addict found in one such house. The book was subsequently adapted into a popular stage play and, in 2001, was made into a film by Richard Lowenstein, starring Noah Taylor, Emily Hamilton and Sophie Lee. In 2004, to celebrate the book's ten-year anniversary, Birmingham approached comic artist Ryan Vella to produce a graphic novel of the book. The pair met in April of that year at Artspace Mackay, for the opening of the Headspace exhibition. The comic was published in September 2004 by Duffy & Snellgrove.
The Tasmanian Babes Fiasco
He Died with a Felafel in His Hand is a novel by Australian author John Birmingham , first published in 1994 by The Yellow Press ( ISBN 1-875989-21-8 ). The story consists of a collection of colourful anecdotes about living in share houses in Brisbane and other cities in Australia with variously dubious housemates. The title refers to a deceased heroin addict found in one such house. The book was subsequently adapted into a popular stage play and, in 2001, was made into a film by Richard Lowenstein , starring Noah Taylor , Emily Hamilton and Sophie Lee .
In 2004, to celebrate the book's ten-year anniversary, Birmingham approached comic artist Ryan Vella to produce a graphic novel of the book. The pair met in April of that year at Artspace Mackay , for the opening of the Headspace exhibition. The comic was published in September 2004 by Duffy & Snellgrove ( ISBN 1-876631-95-3 ).
Synopsis
While the book is not written in a linear fashion the order of houses (and house mates) John lives in is as follows:
1st Place - The Boulevade
Tom lived in the garage
Mel lived upstairs. Her boyfriend Warren moved in some time later. When they moved out, replaced by
Andy the Med Student (Dr Death) moved in
Tom moved out and is replaced by
Derek the Bank Clerk
Tom and John got a new place
Derek the Bank Clerk (lived in a tent). Replaced by
Martin the Paranoid Wargamer. Lasted three weeks and was replaced by
Taylor the Taxi Driver
