Kiss Me, Judas (1998) is the first published novel by American author Will Christopher Baer. The plot uses an urban legend, with protagonist Phineas Poe waking up in a hotel bathtub full of ice to discover that somebody has removed one of his kidneys. It is considered to be squarely in the genre of neo-noir. Will Christopher Baer finished Kiss Me, Judas in two weeks while staying in a borrowed artist's studio in East Bay that "had a coffeemaker, cheap stereo, and toilet. And disturbing paintings on the wall. " After publication, it was selected as one of Barnes & Noble's Best New Voices for Fall of 1998. According to the author's website, Kiss Me Judas has been optioned for a film by Mythic Films, with Ralph Hemeker working on the script.
Plot summary
During his first night out of a mental institution after suffering a nervous breakdown, Phineas Poe is picked up by a prostitute named Jude. She drugs him and removes his kidney and leaves him in a hotel bathtub full of ice with a note on the counter that reads, "If you want to live, call 9-1-1." Phineas, an ex-police officer who had recently been searching for information against the Denver Police Department's Internal Affairs Unit, later finds out that his kidney was actually replaced by a bag of heroin. While searching for his missing kidney, Phineas finds love in his attacker, while he evades the angry Denver police and tries to unlock the secrets behind his wife's recent death.
Reception
Critical reception for Kiss Me, Judas was mixed. [1] [2] Entertainment Weekly gave the book a "C+", writing that Baer's "scalpel-sharp noir style proves a mesmerizing lure, but it can't compensate for a hazy plot that veers from the nauseating (much gratuitous, ornately sadistic violence) to the nonsensical". [3] The Chicago Tribune also gave a mixed review, recommending the book to "fans of James Ellroy's more elliptical writing" but writing that it took a while to get into the book's rhythm. [4] Kirkus Reviews gave a more positive review, stating that "Baer will almost certainly write better books than this, but probably not with such youthful verve, bare nerve-ends, or frigidly droll, dead-on metaphors". [5]
