Edwina, the Dinosaur Who Didn't Know She Was Extinct is a children's picture book by Mo Willems. It was released in 2006 by Hyperion Books. In the book, Edwina the dinosaur is well loved by the people of her town due to her acts of kindness. However, a boy named Reginald Von Hoobie-Doobie tries to convince everyone that dinosaurs are supposed to be extinct. Eventually, Edwina appeases him with a fresh batch of cookies.
LC Class
PZ7.W65535 Edw 2006
Edwina, the Dinosaur Who Didn't Know She Was Extinct is a children's picture book by Mo Willems . It was released in 2006 by Hyperion Books .
In the book, Edwina the dinosaur is well loved by the people of her town due to her acts of kindness. However, a boy named Reginald Von Hoobie-Doobie tries to convince everyone that dinosaurs are supposed to be extinct. Eventually, Edwina appeases him with a fresh batch of cookies.
Reception
The book was well-received, winning a National Parenting Publications Award in 2006. [1] Steve Johnson of the Wichita Eagle declared, "Willems has written a unique story every bit as good as the classic Danny and the Dinosaur . His illustrations are playful with bright colors and bold expressions." [2] Lana Berkowitz of the Houston Chronicle called it "a winner", [3] while The Courier-Journal 's Jill Johnson Keeney said it was a "worthy successor" to Willems' earlier books, such as Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus! and Knuffle Bunny: A Cautionary Tale . [4]
"Hoobie-Doobie"
Explaining Reginald's last name to an interviewer, Willems said, "'Hoobie-Doobie' is my generic fill-in for when I can't think of a word (as in 'Hand me the Hoobie-Doobie, please.'). Because I consistently blank on the English language, it's a phrase that is heard quite a bit around the house. My editor always giggles when I use the phrase, so I plopped it in as a place-holder when I pitched the story." [5]
^ Helen Foster James and Kathleen Krull. "The best in books". The Telegraph (Nashua) . 1 December 2006.
^ Steve Johnson. "Extinct? Edwina doesn't care". The Wichita Eagle . 27 August 2006.
^ Lana Berkowitz. "Dinosaurs, knights and a bearded lady". Houston Chronicle . 18 September 2006.
^ Jill Johnson Keeney. "Just for kids". The Courier-Journal . 16 September 2006.
^ John Mark Eberhart. "Dinosaur, Junior! Author/illustrator brings Edwina to life for kids -- and adults, too." The Kansas City Star . 24 September 2006.
This article about a children's picture book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
