Life As We Knew It is a young adult science fiction novel by American author Susan Beth Pfeffer, first published in 2006 by Harcourt Books. It is the first book in the "Last Survivors Trilogy", followed by The Dead and the Gone. When an asteroid hits the moon and brings it closer to Earth, life in Northeastern Pennsylvania will never be the same again.
Characters
Miranda- a sixteen-year-old girl. She is the main character. She has two brothers, one of whom she is jealous of, and the other she idolizes. Her favorite sport and hobby used to be ice skating, however she broke her ankle prior to the book's events. She now swims instead. She idolizes Brandon, a local and world-famous ice skater.
Megan- Miranda's overly-religious friend. She used to be carefree before she went to church, an interest that began when their mutual friend Becky died. She begins to starve herself at the beginning of the incident with the moon because her pastor told her that God is punishing the human race for their sins. She dies at the end of the book due to her starvation.
Sammi- another of Miranda's friends. She had been with numerous boys and fights with Megan, who believes that she leads an immoral life. Shortly after the incident, she leaves the town with her 40-year-old boyfriend called George.
Matt- Miranda's older brother, who chops firewood for his family everyday. He is looked up to by his mother and siblings (Miranda "cares desperately what he thinks of her", despite denying it), and is 'in charge' of providing and caring for their family.
Jonny- Miranda's younger brother who wants to be a baseball player. He is secretly voted most likely to live by his family, but comes to resent this when he realizes that they are starving themselves to allow him to eat more.
Laura- Miranda's mother, who is a writer. She starves herself because she is scared her children won't have enough to eat. She is dating Peter.
Peter- Miranda's mom's boyfriend, who is a doctor. He works throughout the events, but unfortunately succumbs to a deadly flu many months after the incident.
Becky- Miranda's friend whom she constantly dreams about. She died before the book begins. She "was like the glue" between Miranda, Megan, and Sammi, and when she died they began to go separate ways.
Mrs. Wayne- Megan's mother. She worries greatly that her daughter is starving herself, as she does not share Megan's religious beliefs. When Megan dies of starvation, Mrs. Wayne hangs herself.
Dad- Miranda's dad. He remarried Lisa.
Lisa- Miranda's stepmother. She becomes pregnant. She and Miranda's Dad ask Miranda if she wants to be the baby's godmother.
Dan- a boy on Miranda's swim team, whom she begins to go swimming with in the local pond, Miller's Pond, after their local indoor pool is closed. They share a short relationship, but he leaves to go to California after his family discover that his sister, who lived there, is dead. In end , Miranda meets Dan and has an affair.
Horton- The family cat who runs away after Miranda leaves the door open, but comes back. His favourite person in the family is Jonny.
Brandon- an ice skater from their town who is training for the Olympics. He is idolized by skaters worldwide. He has a fansite dedicated to him, which Miranda went on frequently before the incident. She meets him at the ice rink and they chat and skate shortly.
Mrs. Nesbitt- an older woman who is like family to Miranda and her family, due to the fact that she cared for Miranda's mother when she was a child. When she eventually dies of cold in her house, she tells Miranda that she must take everything of use to help her family survive. They also collected her well water, which hadn't dried up like theirs.
George- Sammi's 40-year-old boyfriend, with whom she moves to Dallas.
Reverend Marshall- The pastor at Megan's church. By telling his congregation that God will sustain them, and behaving in a falsely caring manner, he ensures that they bring him food by way of thanks. This means that he has much more to eat than most people, something which greatly enrages Miranda.
Reception
Kirkus Reviews said that "death is a constant threat, and Pfeffer instills despair right to the end but is cognizant to provide a ray of hope with a promising conclusion. Plausible science fiction with a frighteningly realistic reminder of recent tragedies here and abroad." [1] Ilene Cooper said in her review for Booklist that "each page is filled with events both wearying and terrifying and infused with honest emotions. Pfeffer bring's cataclysmic tragedy very close." [2]
Awards
Pfeffer's book was named Young Adult Library Services Association 's Best Books for Young Adults in 2007, and shortlisted for the Andre Norton Award for Outstanding Science Fiction or Fantasy Book of 2007. In addition, it won the Booklist Editor's Choice Award for Books for Youth (Older Reader's Category) in 2006. [3] It was nominated for the 2009 Rebecca Caudill Young Readers' Book Award and the Truman Readers Award of 2008-2009. [4]
References
^ "LIFE AS WE KNEW IT". Kirkus Reviews 74 (18): 963. September 15, 2006. ISSN   0042-6598 . 
^ Cooper, Ilene (September 1, 2006). "Life as We Knew It". Booklist 103 (1): 127. ISSN   0006-7385 . 
