The Android's Dream is a science fiction novel by John Scalzi.
Plot synopsis
The story covers the journey of ex-soldier and State Department employee Harry Creek in his work to acquire a sheep of the Android's Dream breed for the coronation ceremony of the Nidu. The Nidu assert that unless a sheep can be provided, that the political and diplomatic fallout will cause the Nidu to declare war on Earth, a war Earth will lose badly. The genetically designed breed is very rare and believed extinct after a sect of Nidu intent on deposing the government exterminate all known samples, leading Harry on a chase to find one along with assistance from Brian, an AI based on Harry's childhood friend. The only surviving remnant of the Android's Dream turns out to be Robin Baker, a young lady who is the child of an Android's Dream sheep and human hybrid. At the center of the story is the Church of the Evolved Lamb, whose members recognize that its founding was a total scam, but are devoted to making its prophecies come true anyway.
Harry slowly meets and befriends Robin after numerous attempts to capture her (most notably being a daring escape in Arlington Mall). They flee from a group out to kill her to derail the Nidu coronation, and hide on an instellar liner. The Nidu attack the liner to capture Robin, and Harry eventually surrenders on the stipulation that Robin not be harmed before or after the coronation. During this, the Earth government injunct with the Colonial Convention courts that Robin Baker is not human, and actually the sole member of her own unique species, and entitled to protection from the CC.
Being forced to participate in the ceremony, Robin sabotages the proceedings by declaring herself the new Nidu leader, and Brian the controller of the Nidu network, effectively turning control of the entire Nidu nation over to Brian. During this, the Church also declares that Robin is the Evolved Lamb, as she has completed a majority of their prophecies, effectively making her a living goddess, a sovereign, and the single richest person on earth over the course of several minutes.
2006, United States, Tor Books ISBN 0-7653-0941-6 , October 2006, Hardback
2007, United States, Tor Science Fiction ISBN 0-7653-4828-4 , October 2007, Paperback
Sources, references, external links, quotations
