The Sea of Monsters is a fantasy-adventure novel based on Greek mythology written by Rick Riordan published in 2006. It is the second novel in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series and the sequel to The Lightning Thief. This book chronicles the adventures of thirteen-year-old demigod Percy Jackson as he and his friends rescue his satyr friend Grover from the Cyclops Polyphemus and save the camp from a Titan's attack by bringing the Golden Fleece to cure Thalia's poisoned pine tree. The Sea of Monsters was generally well received and was nominated for numerous awards, including the 2006 Book Sense Top Ten Summer Pick and the 2009 Mark Twain Award. It sold over 100,000 copies in paperback and was released in audiobook format on September 6, 2006. The Sea of Monsters is followed by The Titan's Curse, the third book of the five in the series. A film adaptation of the book, Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, is scheduled for an August 16, 2013 release.
You shall sail the iron ship with warriors of bone,
You shall find what you seek and make it your own,
But despair for your life entombed within stone,
And fail without friends, to fly home alone.
Summary
This article's plot summary may be too long or excessively detailed . Please help improve it by removing unnecessary details and making it more concise.
(October 2013)
Percy Jackson is having nightmares about a cyclops chasing Grover Underwood. At school, a group of Laistrygonian giants attack Percy, but he is saved by his half-brother Tyson (a cyclops disguised as a human). Annabeth takes Percy and Tyson to Camp Half-Blood, but they arrive to find the camp under attack by two bronze Colchis bulls. Thalia's tree has been poisoned, leaving the camp vulnerable to enemy attacks. After Clarisse la Rue and Tyson defeat the bulls, Chiron is suspected of poisoning the tree (largely because of his familial connection to the titan Kronos ) and is fired from the camp. Tantalus is brought from his prison in Tartarus to be Chiron's replacement.
Percy has another dream about Grover. This time, Grover explains a cyclops named Polyphemus is holding him captive in the "Sea of Monsters", and he is talking to Percy through an empathy link, allowing them to communicate through dreams. When he awakens, Percy tells Annabeth about his dreams, and she deduces Grover may have found the Golden Fleece , which can cure Thalia's poisoned tree. They ask Tantalus to send someone on a quest to find the Golden Fleece, and he sends Clarisse. Percy, Annabeth and Tyson embark on another quest to find the Fleece because Hermes gave them a bunch of gifts to help them on their quest and they call on Hippocampi, horses with fish tails that are capable of swimming to get to the cruise ship that will take them to the sea of monsters.
The hippocampi take Percy and his friends to a passing cruise ship, the Princess Andromeda, which appears to have no passengers or crew. Sneaking on board, however, they discover the ship belongs to Luke Castellan and the Titan Army. They escape on a lifeboat and eventually find land. Percy sends Tyson off to get some doughnuts as an excuse to talk to Annabeth privately, but to his surprise, Tyson actually does get a box of doughnuts from a suspicious doughnut shop that has appeared nearby. The shop is connected to the life force of a hydra , which attacks and nearly kills them, but they are saved by Clarisse, who is sailing on a confederate battleship called the CSS Birmingham.
They sail for the Sea of Monsters, which is situated within the Bermuda Triangle , but the CSS Birmingham is attacked and destroyed by the monsters Charybdis and Scylla . The ship's engine overheats and explodes, and Tyson (who was in the engine room at the time) is presumed dead. Percy and Annabeth escape on a wooden raft, which Annabeth steers by opening the thermos of winds. They steer to a nearby island, where they find "CC's Spa and Resort". The spa resort's owner is the sorceress Circe , while the spa itself is actually a prison for male demigods. Circe turns Percy into a guinea pig and puts him in a cage with six others. Annabeth frees the guinea pigs and feeds them Hermes' vitamins, making them human again. The other six guinea pigs are revealed to be the crew of the notorious pirate Blackbeard (the demigod son of Ares), and Percy and Annabeth leave Circe's island on Blackbeard's ship, the Queen Anne's Revenge. As they pass the island of the Sirens , Annabeth requests Percy to tie her to the ship's mast so she can listen to the Siren song, which makes the listener see their deepest desires, but is so enchanting that they will become hypnotised and attempt to reach the Sirens at all costs. He does so, but forgets to take away her knife, and she cuts herself free and starts swimming to the island. Percy manages to stop Annabeth, but when he touches her he sees a vision of what the song is making her see: Manhattan rebuilt, and Annabeth having a picnic with her parents and a reformed Luke.
Returning to the ship, Percy and Annabeth reach Polyphemus' island and are reunited with Tyson and Clarisse, who survived the CSS Birmingham sinking. They rescue Grover (who explains that he came to the Sea of Monsters in search of Pan ) and find the Golden Fleece, but Polyphemus confronts them, chases them off the island and sinks the Queen Anne's Revenge. The hippocampi return, collect Percy and his friends and set off back to the mainland, and Percy instructs Clarisse to return to Camp Half-Blood with the fleece. On their way, however, they are captured by Luke and taken to the Princess Andromeda. Percy manages to contact Camp Half-Blood through an Iris message (which allows long-distance communication through rainbows), and tricks Luke into admitting that he poisoned Thalia's tree, proving Chiron's innocence. Luke and Percy have a duel over the fleece, grapple actually, and Percy is badly injured, but Chiron and a group of other centaurs called the "Party Ponies" arrive and save him.
Returning to the camp, Chiron is given his job back and the Golden Fleece removes the poison from Thalia's tree. However, Thalia Grace herself (Zeus' demigod daughter, whom Zeus turned into the tree when she died to prevent her soul going to the underworld) is ejected from the tree and revived. [5]
Main article: List of Camp Half-Blood characters
Percy Jackson : The son of Poseidon; a 13-year-old demigod who travels to the island of Polyphemus in the Bermuda Triangle to find Grover and recover the Golden Fleece . He is accompanied by Annabeth and Tyson, his half-brother, on the quest. He is successful in the end; and gives Clarisse the Fleece while he is attacked by Luke on his way to the Camp. However, he and his friends are rescued by Chiron and the Party Ponies.
Annabeth Chase : The daughter of Athena. A demigod who is 13 years old and a friend of Percy. She accompanies him to the island and helps him in his quest by rescuing Percy from Circe's island. Annabeth is injured by Polyphemus and recovers with the help of the Golden Fleece. She accompanies Percy to Camp after Chiron succeeds in rescuing them from the hands of Luke and the Titan army.
Grover Underwood : The guard for Percy given by the gods, a satyr who has been captured by Polyphemus during his search for the wild god Pan . Due to his poor eyesight, Polyphemus mistakes Grover for a female Cyclops. He is rescued by his friends Percy and Annabeth.
Clarisse La Rue: Daughter of Ares who was given the quest of retrieving the Golden Fleece . With the help of Percy and his friends, she is successful in her quest. Percy gives her the Fleece that she takes to Camp Half Blood. Polyphemus wishes to wed her after it is revealed to him that Grover is a male satyr.
Luke Castellan : The main antagonist, now 20; he works for Kronos. He captures Percy and the rest before being thwarted by Chiron and his brethren, the Party Ponies.
Tyson the Cyclops : Percy's half brother; he is initially portrayed as a homeless child before Annabeth helps Percy realize that he is a Cyclops . He accompanies Percy and Annabeth in their quest and befriends a hippocampus whom he names Rainbow. When Clarisse's ship explodes, he is presumed dead until it is learned that he was actually saved.
Critical reception
The Sea of Monsters received generally positive reviews with reviewers praising the storyline, the themes and the author's style of writing. [6] [7] [8] "In a feat worthy of his heroic subjects, Riordan crafts a sequel stronger than his compelling debut," said a Publishers Weekly review. [9] School Library Journal singled out the novel's plot and main character, stating, "Percy is an appealing kid, and the subject of a chilling prophecy may resonate with readers." [7] Child magazine wrote, "Featuring the cliff-hangers and sassy attitude kids loved in The Lightning Thief – plus a surprising new family secret – this outstanding sequel should win over a fresh legion of fans." [10] Children's Literature called the writing extraordinary [10] and added, "This book, sequel to The Lightning Thief, is an amazing mixture of mythology and young adult fiction." [10] Matt Berman, of Common Sense Media, praised the book, saying "The Percy Jackson series continues to be pure fun, with the author doing nearly everything right to produce a book that few kids will be able to resist." [8] Norah Piehl of Kidsreads.com lauded the style of the book, and noted similarities with its prequel. [6] It sold over 100,000 copies in hardcover by the time paperback copies were released in April 2007. [3]
However, Kirkus was critical of the book, writing, "it's doubtful Percy wouldn't guess Tyson's otherworldly connection immediately after the dodgeball game ... some of the humor will zip over the heads of the target audience" although they added, "Percy's sardonic narration and derring-do would keep the pages turning." [11]
