The Hundred Days (1998) is a historical novel written by British author Patrick O'Brian. It is the nineteenth novel in the Aubrey-Maturin series, set during the Napoleonic Wars. The title refers to the Hundred Days, a period when Napoleon Bonaparte escaped from Elba and temporarily returned to power in France. Aubrey's squadron is dispatched to the Ionian and Adriatic to put an end to Bonapartist shipbuilding there, and to persuade French ships to come over to the Allies, and to take, sink, burn, or destroy those that do not. It is also the intention of a Muslim confederacy to prevent the junction of the Russian and Prussian armies, or at least to delay it long enough for Napoleon's superior numbers to crush each of the Allied states separately. However, the large number of Muslim mercenaries require payment, which is to come from a Muslim state on the confines of Morocco, travelling by way of Algiers. Maturin and his assistant, Dr Jacob, are on board the Surprise to help intercept this payment. In the novel, Stephen's wife Diana dies, as does Aubrey's mother-in-law, Mrs Williams and her equally unpleasant companion, in a crash when Diana's rash driving overturns their coach. Diana's death leaves Stephen completely shattered, unwilling to eat or speak for long periods of time, but he pulls himself together to foil Napoleon's latest plot. Christine Hatherleigh's husband, Captain Wood, the colonial governor of Sierra Leone also dies (Dr Glover tells Stephen their marriage was almost a sham given that the husband was impotent). Aubrey's coxswain, Barret Bonden, is killed in single ship action.
Plot summary
Commodore Aubrey's squadron arrives at Gibraltar , where Lord Keith updates him on Napoleon's escape and rearmament, and orders him to first defend a convoy of East Indiamen from Moorish xebecs and galleys , and then to proceed to the Adriatic to disarm or destroy several new French ships being built there. Maturin, in a separate meeting, is informed of a plot to send a vast quantity of gold through Algiers in order to fund Muslim mercenaries for Napoleon's army. Although Aubrey's squadron is successful in defending the convoy, one of the squadron's captains is unable to bear the guilt of having necessarily killed so many Christian slaves in the action with the galleys and commits suicide. Aubrey then proceeds toward the Adriatic, stopping off in Mahón along the way. They encounter Captain Christy-Palliere—Captain of the Royalist Caroline, and an old acquaintance—who informs Jack about the French situation in the Adriatic before sailing on to Mahon. Surprise then sails to Ragusa Vecchia where a newly refitted French frigate, under the command of Charles de La Tour—an ardent Buonapartist—is based and they sink it. They then proceed to the Porte di Spalato where they meet another French frigate. Drs. Maturin and Jacob are sent aboard to negotiate and an agreement is reached to fight a mock battle after which the French will accompany the English ships back to Malta. They also lay out a considerable amount of gold to bribe disgruntled dockworkers to burn new French ships in dockyards along the coast.
After next reaching Algiers and meeting the Consul, Sir Peter Clifford, and his wife, Maturin and Jacob attend an interview with the Dey 's Vizier at Kasbah , the Dey's palace. The doctors are instructed to travel onwards to meet the Dey, Omar Pasha, at his hunting-lodge at Shatt el Khadna. The Dey invites Stephen to go lion hunting with him, where the Dey kills a large lion while Stephen kills its lioness as it attacks the two of them, saving the Dey's life. For this deed, Omar Pasha swears that no assistance will be given to the Muslim plot, and gives Stephen one of his rifles as a parting gift. Jacob then discovers the Vizier has sent a secret message to the Sheikh of Azgar, Ibn Hazm, to have the gold carried by a fast-sailing xebec from Arzila (just southwest of Tangiers), captained by an Algerian corsair via the Strait of Gibraltar straight to Durazzo. The Doctors then learn that Omar Pasha has been assassinated by the Vizier, who privately admires Buonaparte.
The doctors are taken aboard the Ringle, Surprise's tender , along with two Irish children whom Stephen buys from a slaver, and join Aubrey back in Port Mahon. They then proceed to Gibraltar to update Lord Barmouth on the situation, encountering Hamadryad and their old friend Heneage Dundas along the way. Aubrey is disliked by the new Commander-in-Chief for having discreetly turned away his son on an earlier commission and Jack feels his plan may be given to another frigate. However, Barmouth's politico, Matthew Arden, is highly influential in Whitehall and a close friend of Lord Keith and Maturin assures Jack he will not be ill-used. Jack is also a cousin of Isobel Carrington, Barmouth's new young wife. The Admiral's attitude becomes more friendly once she makes him aware of this.
Dr Jacob finds out the corsair has hired two galleys to act as decoys - one on the African side and one mid-channel - whilst he lies under Tarifa before running through the Straits. The Surprise lies in wait in the Straits and on spotting the galley, gives chase. Murad Reis, its captain, fires on the frigate and destroys the second gun of her starboard broadside, killing Bonden, Aubrey's longtime coxswain, as well as Hallam, a midshipman. After a long pursuit, the galley holes up at Cranc (Crab) island, where Surprise and Ringle, unable to follow the galley into the shallow lagoon, block the exit, while one of Surprise's guns is hoisted up a cliff, where it can fire unopposed on the galley. The galley's men, seeing the situation is hopeless, behead Murad and surrender.
After returning victorious to Gibraltar, there is some dispute over the gold but Ali Bey is deposed and the new Dey, Hassan, renounces his claim (given that the Surprise was fired on first) in return for the galley and a £250,000 loan to consolidate his position in Algiers. The Commander-in-Chief, on the advice of Lord Keith, gives his assent and the Algerine delegation is given a handsome send-off. The end of the book coincides with Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo and thus the effective end of the Napoleonic wars. Aubrey and Maturin set sail for Chile in the Surprise to try and undermine the Spanish colonial rule there - a continuation of the theme of The Wine-Dark Sea .
Jack Aubrey - Commodore and later on HMS Surprise
Stephen Maturin - ship's surgeon, friend to Jack and an intelligence officer
Sophie Aubrey - Jack's wife
