The Letter of Marque is an historical novel by Patrick O'Brian set during the Napoleonic Wars. It was first published by HarperCollins in 1988 and is the twelfth book in the Aubrey-Maturin series, concerning the adventures of naval commander Jack Aubrey, and his friend, ship's surgeon, naturalist and spy, Stephen Maturin.
Plot summary
In The Letter of Marque, Jack Aubrey, now a civilian, prepares the Surprise to sail as a privateer (the eponymous letter of marque is a legal document from the British government which gives his private vessel the right to capture ships from enemy nations). While Jack often associated "privateers" with legalised pirates , he agrees to sail the Surprise, but always refers to the ship under the more respectable term "Letter of Marque." Jack is bitter and low-spirited about his dismissal from the Navy List , and dreads affronts and disrespectful treatment from any Royal Navy vessels and their officers. However, he is strongly supported by his crew, primarily smugglers and followers of Sethianism from the fictional port of Shelmerston in southwest England .
The downfall of the traitors Wray and Ledward in the previous book has restored order in British intelligence circles, and Maturin—now the secret owner of the Surprise—plans to use her privateering as cover for a covert anti-Spanish mission to South America . The ship is therefore under official protection to an extent and Aubrey's innocence is known privately to many, though the spies are still at large and politics will make his rehabilitation impossible without extraordinary deeds on his part. They depart on a cruise, during which Maturin's servant Padeen becomes a secret laudanum addict after painful dental surgery. In order to obtain the laudanum secretly, Padeen begins diluting Maturin's own supplies with brandy. Maturin is thus unknowingly weaned off his own addiction (though he later substitutes it with the practice of chewing coca leaves).
The Surprise captures an American privateer's consort, the Merlin, and then boards the privateer Spartan itself, retrieving its valuable cargo of quicksilver , looted from the Spanish barque Azul, as well as tricking her five prizes out of Horta harbour. These, together with his success in the cutting-out of the frigate Diane from the French port of Saint Martin-de-Rey despite serious wounds, make Aubrey both wealthy again and a popular hero. He is offered the opportunity to seek a free pardon, but angrily declines on the grounds that he is innocent and that asking for a pardon would imply that he was guilty. His friends fear that this has dashed his chance of redemption. However, Aubrey's embarrassing father, a fugitive since his part in the stock-jobbing affair, is found dead in a ditch, and Aubrey is offered a Parliamentary seat by his cousin, Edward Norton, who owns the borough of Milport. This extra influence is enough for him to receive private assurances from Lord Melville , First Lord of the Admiralty, that he will indeed be restored to the Navy List as soon as the time is right.
Maturin, in possession once more of Diana's magnificent Blue Peter diamond, decides to take it to her in Sweden. He sails part of the way on the old Leopard , the setting for most of Desolation Island and now a lowly transport ship, before re-joining the Surprise. Away from the Surprise and his now diluted supplies he purchases a full-strength bottle of laudanum in anticipation of seeing his wife Diana again. He meets her in Stockholm and is unsurprised to learn that the letter he sent to her from Gibraltar via Wray, accounting for his supposed infidelity, was never delivered. She also tells him she has not been unfaithful with Jagiello, and has been supporting herself by ascending—whilst mounted on a small Arab horse—in a hot-air balloon before an audience. Maturin, still unaware that his tolerance for laudanum has been reduced by Padeen's covert thefts, takes a full strength dosage and becomes disoriented. He is seriously injured in a fall after losing his bearings in Jagiello's household. Diana nurses him back to health and they become reconciled once more. When the Surprise returns from a trip to Riga to buy poldavy, Maturin hears from Aubrey about Padeen's laudanum addiction, discovered after he was caught siphoning laudanum from one of the carboys and replacing the tincture with brandy. Stephen is well enough to be finally transported back to the ship, accompanied by Colonel Jagiello's escort, and Diana embarks with him and Jack for home.
