Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus! is a children's picture book by Mo Willems. Released by Hyperion Press in 2003, it was Willems' first book for children, and received the Caldecott Honor. The plot is about a bus driver who has to leave so he asks the reader to watch the Pigeon. The pigeon tries many excuses and tries to finagle readers into letting him drive the bus. An animated adaptation of the book won the 2010 Carnegie Medal for Excellence in Children's Video.
Willems has created further books about the Pigeon's adventures:
The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog! (2004)
Don't Let the Pigeon Stay Up Late! (2006)
The Pigeon Wants a Puppy! (2008)
The Duckling Gets a Cookie!? (2012) [3]
The Pigeon Has Feelings, Too! (2005)
The Pigeon Loves Things That Go! (2005)
Reception
In addition to the Caldecott Honor, Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus! was an American Library Association Notable Book , a National Council of Teachers of English Notable Book, and a Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books Blue Ribbon Book. [4] Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children." [5] It was one of the "Top 100 Picture Books" of all time in a 2012 poll by School Library Journal . [6]
The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog! is a Publishers Weekly Best Book of the Year. [7] Don't Let the Pigeon Stay Up Late! is a Parenting Magazine Best Book. [8] The Pigeon Wants a Puppy! is the 2009 Children’s Choice Kindergarten to Second Grade Book of the Year. [9]
Each of the four of the standard-format Pigeon books have been on the New York Times best-seller list .
A 2011 scientific study entitled "Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus" examined the ability of pigeons to solve the traveling salesperson problem by taking the shortest route to visit multiple feeders in a laboratory. The authors found that pigeons "appeared to plan ahead multiple steps," which provided "clear and strong evidence that animals other than primates are capable of planning sophisticated travel routes." [10] [11]
A parody, "Don't Let The Republican Drive The Bus" (not by Willems) replaces the pigeon with a vulture and advocates Democratic ideals. [12]
