The Man Who Walked Between the Towers is a children's picture book written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein. Published in 2003, the book tells the true story of Philippe Petit, a man who walked between the twin towers of the World Trade Center on a tightrope. Gerstein won the 2004 Caldecott Medal for his illustrations. The book was adapted into an animated short film with the same name in 2005 for Weston Woods Studios by Michael Sporn. It was narrated by Jake Gyllenhaal. The film received the Audience Choice Award for best short film at the 2005 Heartland Film Festival, and the award for Best Short Animation Made for Children at the 2006 Ottawa International Animation Festival. It is included as an extra on the DVD of the Oscar-winning documentary Man on Wire. The book was also adapted into a two-act ballet of the same name at Rowan University. It was conceived, directed and choreographed by Paule Turner and premiered in December 2008 to exceptionally good reviews. While dancing was the primary medium, the production also made use of puppetry, especially during the wirewalking sequence.
LC Class
GV551 .G47 2003
The Man Who Walked Between the Towers is a children's picture book written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein . Published in 2003, the book tells the true story of Philippe Petit , a man who walked between the twin towers of the World Trade Center on a tightrope . Gerstein won the 2004 Caldecott Medal for his illustrations. [1]
The book was adapted into an animated short film with the same name in 2005 for Weston Woods Studios by Michael Sporn . [2] It was narrated by Jake Gyllenhaal . The film received the Audience Choice Award for best short film at the 2005 Heartland Film Festival , [3] and the award for Best Short Animation Made for Children at the 2006 Ottawa International Animation Festival . It is included as an extra on the DVD of the Oscar-winning documentary Man on Wire .
The book was also adapted into a two-act ballet of the same name at Rowan University . It was conceived, directed and choreographed by Paule Turner and premiered in December 2008 to exceptionally good reviews. [4] While dancing was the primary medium, the production also made use of puppetry, especially during the wirewalking sequence.
