Treason's Harbour is a historical novel by British author Patrick O'Brian, set during the Napoleonic period, which follows the life of two friends, naval captain Jack Aubrey and his ship's surgeon Stephen Maturin. It is the ninth book in the Aubrey-Maturin series.
Plot summary
Jack and Stephen are at Malta waiting on the repair of the much-battered HMS Surprise , Jack's command. Both men befriend a young pretty lieutenant's wife, Mrs Fielding, whose husband is a prisoner-of-war in France. French intelligence agents use Lieutenant Fielding's plight to manipulate Mrs Fielding into spying for them. They eventually compel her to make advances upon Maturin to find out any information. Jack, who is taking Italian lessons from Mrs Fielding, cannot resist making advances towards her, which she rebuffs directly. Aubrey rescues her Illyrian mastiff , Ponto, one evening out of a well, but himself falls in. This leads to the rumour that he is sleeping with her. Maturin and Aubrey also meet Andrew Wray again - Second Secretary to the Admiralty , who has been sent to Malta to sort out dockyard corruption. Jack had an unpleasant previous meeting with him at a gambling house in Portsmouth when he indirectly accused Wray of cheating. As Jack formally introduces Captain Pullings to him, Wray tells Pullings he had insisted on Captain Aubrey's recommendation, adding: '... at one time Captain Aubrey seemed to do me an injustice, and by promoting his lieutenant I could, as the sea-phrase goes, the better wipe his eye.'
Maturin suspects the French are after him. His suspicions are confirmed when Mrs Fielding ham-handedly tries to seduce him. To keep her safe and to work intelligence in the other direction Stephen, with her cooperation, makes a pretense of being romantically involved with her.
Jack and the Surprises are dispatched on a secret mission by the new Commander-in-Chief, the highly competent Admiral Ives, to take the Dromedary and capture a Turkish galley laden with French silver in the Red Sea . Unfortunately, the mission has been talked about for many months. The Surprise's crew has to traverse the Sinai Peninsula and eventually meet the HEI ship Niobe in Suez . Jack takes command and sails her down the Red Sea with a troop of Turkish troops to intercept the galley. They eventually spot it and give chase but Jack notices that the galley is playing a trick on him, using a drag sail to artificially slow their speed, and orders his gunner to sink it.
Stephen, who at the beginning of the novel bought a diving bell , is persuaded by moral pressure from the crew and officers to Jack to recover the treasure. After he and Mr Martin bring up the first sealed chest, they find it only contains heavy lead bars and a rude note, Merde a celui qui le lit. They meet a fishing boat and find out that the galley had been rowing up and down the sea for a month, waiting to lure them under the French fortification's cannon. Their mission a failure, they return on the Niobe to Suez and offload the bitterly disappointed Turkish troops. They have to retrace their steps across the desert but this time their camels are stolen by Bedouin horsemen and they reach Tina almost dead from thirst. Fortunately, the Dromedaries are there to revive them and they return to Malta.
Here Jack learns from Admiral Ives that the Surprise is to return to England and be scrapped. Stephen, meanwhile, renews his acquaintance with Mrs Fielding and plants some false information for her to give Leuseur. He also thrashes Wray at piquet for high stakes, leaving Wray very indebted. Jack is given a mission with the re-fitted Surprise to take the Adriatic convoy up the Ionian . While there he meets an old friend, Captain Cotton of the Nymphe, who has just rescued an escaped French prisoner-of-war, Lieutenant Charles Fielding. Fielding, having heard the rumour of Jack's liaison with his wife, not only refuses his offer to return him to Malta but also requests a "meeting" (a duel ).
On the return journey Captain Dundas, commanding the massive seventy-four gun Edinburgh, tells Jack of a small French privateer that Jack eventually captures. Unfortunately the chase brings the Surprise in late to port behind Babbington's sloop, the Dryad, and the news of Lt. Fielding's escape has already circulated. Stephen overhears a conversation at Mrs Fielding's house between Lesueur and Boulay, placed high up in the Governor's staff, to assassinate her but manages to take her aboard the Surprise. Sir Francis Ives instructs Aubrey to sail for Zambra to threaten the Dey of Mascara into not attacking British ships, accompanied by the Pollux returning Admiral Harte back to England (Zambra and Mascara are a fictitious city and state on the Barbary Coast ).
While the Pollux is exiting the Bay of Zambra, a French squadron consisting of a two-decker eighty gun man-of-war and two frigates with French colours fire on her. The old sixty-four gun Pollux eventually blows up but damages the French newly built third rate. The two frigates chase the Surprise deep into the bay and nearly cut her off until the heavier frigate runs aground on a reef called The Brothers. Her smaller consort deserts the fight and Jack, on the political advice of Maturin, sets sail for Gibraltar .
Jack Aubrey - Captain of HMS Surprise
Stephen Maturin - ship's surgeon, friend to Jack and an intelligence officer
Mrs Sophie Aubrey - Jack's wife
Mrs Diana Maturin (previously known as Diana Villiers ) - Stephen's wife
Captain Pullings - promoted to a commander in the Royal Navy
Mrs Laura Fielding - a young, pretty Lieutenant's wife, spying for the French
Andrew Wray - Second Secretary of the Admiralty
Andre Lesueur - a French intelligence agent posing as a wealthy merchant on Malta
Giuseppe - Lesueur's assistant
Admiral Sir Francis Ives KB - Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet
Admiral Harte - Second-in-Command of the Mediterranean Fleet
Admiral Hartley - Jack's former Admiral in the West Indies
Professor Ebenezer Graham - assigned from his university; an expert on Turkish affairs
Lieutenant Charles Fielding - a prisoner-of-war of the French
Captain Henry Cotton - once a midshipman with Jack and youngsters together on the Resolution
Mr Hairabedian - a Turkish dragoman
Ponto - Mrs Fielding's Illyrian mastiff
Ships in "Treason's Harbour"
British
HMS Worcester (condemned to be a sheer hulk )
HMS Dromedary
