Guess How Much I Love You is a British children's book written by Sam McBratney and illustrated by Anita Jeram, published in 1994 in the UK by Walker Books and in 1995 in the US by its subsidiary Candlewick Press. The book was a 1996 ALA Notable Children's Book. According to its publishers, in addition to the ALA award and numerous other awards, it has sold more than 20 million copies worldwide and been published in 37 languages. Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association in the U.S. named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children. " Guess How Much I Love You has been published in several different formats, suitable for children from age 1½ to 8. It has been adapted as a television cartoon show in the U.S.
Plot summary
This is the story of two Nutbrown Hares, Big Nutbrown Hare and Little Nutbrown Hare. The two are never stated to be father and son in the original storybooks, though are referred to as such in the narration for the animated television series. Little Nutbrown Hare asks Big Nutbrown Hare the titular question, "Guess how much I love you?", and the book continues as the two use larger and larger measures to quantify how much they love each other in answer to the question. The story is simple, but effectively shows the love the two share for each other.
Additional Nutbrown Hare books
In 2007, two additional Nutbrown Hare books were published: When I'm Big: A Guess How Much I Love You Storybook and Colors Everywhere: A Guess How Much I Love You Storybook, later released as a set. In 2008, Let's Play in the Snow: A Guess How Much I Love You Storybook was published. And in 2009, A Surprise for the Nutbrown Hares: A Guess How Much I Love You was published. The Adventures of Little Nutbrown Hare, a 72 page, four-story compilation, was released on August 28, 2012. It features the tales "The Hiding Tree," "On Cloudy Mountain," "The Far Field," and "Coming Home." Its illustrations were provided by Andy Wanger and Debbie Tarbett , "in the style of Anita Jeram."
Animated TV adaptation
In 2012 an animated adaptation of Guess How Much I Love You began airing through Canada's CCI Entertainment and Playhouse Disney . [5] The show is produced by SLR Productions Australia (Suzanne Ryan) and stars the voice of Matthew Jacob Wayne. Reception for the show has been positive and in 2013, received an AACTA Award nomination for "Best Children's Television Series". [6] [7]
Artwork from Guess How Much I Love You
Many of the original images from the Guess How Much I Love You books have been reproduced as Collector's Edition Prints. [1] [8]
