Reflections in a Golden Eye is a 1941 novel by American author Carson McCullers. It first appeared in Harper's Bazaar in 1940, serialized in the October–November issues. The book was published by Houghton Mifflin on February 14, 1941, to mostly poor reviews. The book was dedicated to the Swiss journalist and travel writer Annemarie Schwarzenbach.
Conception
McCullers wrote the piece in 1939, originally using the title "Army Post". She said the story had germinated when, as an adolescent, she had first stepped upon the alien territory of Fort Benning . A more direct inspiration came from a chance remark which her husband Reeves (an ex-soldier) made to her about a voyeur who had been arrested at Fort Bragg (North Carolina) - a young soldier who had been caught peeping inside the married officers' quarters.
The writing took place in Fayetteville, North Carolina . After only two months of arduous writing Mccullers finished the book and put it away in a dresser. "I am so immersed in my characters that their motives are my own. When I write about a thief, I become one; when I write about Captain Penderton, I become a homosexual man. I become the characters I write about and I bless the Latin poet Terence who said 'Nothing human is alien to me.'"[ citation needed ]
Plot summary
The novel takes place at an army base in the U.S. state of Georgia . Private Ellgee Williams, a solitary man full of secrets and desires, has served for two years and is assigned to stable duty. After doing yard work at the home of Capt. Penderton, he sees the captain's wife nude and becomes obsessed with her.
Capt. Weldon Penderton and his wife Leonora, a feeble-minded Army brat , have a fiery relationship and she takes in many lovers. Leonora's current lover, Major Morris Langdon, lives with his depressed wife Alison and her flamboyant Filipino houseboy Anacleto, near the Pendertons.
Capt. Penderton, as a closeted homosexual, realizes that he is physically attracted to Pvt. Williams, but remains unaware of the private's attraction to Leonora.
Reception and critical analysis
After its publication in 1941 the novel caused some embarrassment in Columbus, Georgia and at Fort Benning when people speculated about the source of McCullers' weird tale. [1]
According to author Michael Bronski, McCullers tackles the topics of " homosexuality , sadism , voyeurism , and fetishism [while exploring] the boundaries of eroticism , outsider status and the fragility of normal in Reflections in a Golden Eye." [2]
Reflections in a Golden Eye is considered by Anthony Slide , a modern scholar, to be one of only four familiar gay novels of the first half of the twentieth century in the English language. The other three novels are Djuna Barnes ' Nightwood , Truman Capote 's Other Voices, Other Rooms , and Gore Vidal 's The City and the Pillar . [3]
