The Colour of Magic is a 1983 comic fantasy novel by Terry Pratchett, and is the first book of the Discworld series. Pratchett has described it as "an attempt to do for the classical fantasy universe what Blazing Saddles did for Westerns."
Plot summary
The main character is an incompetent and cynical wizard named Rincewind . He involuntarily becomes a guide to the rich but naive tourist from the Agatean Empire , Twoflower . Forced to flee the city of Ankh-Morpork to escape a terrible fire that was caused by a bartender who misunderstood the concept of insurance, which Twoflower told him about, they begin on a journey across the Disc.
Unknown to them, their journey is controlled by the Gods playing a board game. Rincewind and Twoflower are controlled by the Lady, and are pitted against the champions of Zephyrus, the god of slight breezes, Fate and Offler the Crocodile God, in the game supervised by Blind Io. Twoflower and Rincewind face a mountain troll inconveniently summoned by a god to slow them down and are separated. The ignorant Twoflower ends up being led to the Temple of Bel-Shamharoth , and Rincewind ends up in a tree-nymph inhabited tree in the woods, closely after being confronted by Death. Rincewind manages to escape while the tree-nymphs try to kill him and is reunited with the tourist. Together with Hrun the Barbarian, they escape from the Temple of Bel-Shamharoth the Soul Eater, which collapses. Later, Hrun agrees to travel with and protect Twoflower and Rincewind in exchange for Heroic pictures of him from Twoflower's magical picture box.
They visit Wyrmberg, an upside-down mountain which is home to dragons that only exist in the imagination. The names of the dragons' riders feature punctuation in the middle, making reference and parody of the Dragonriders of Pern series by Anne McCaffrey . The three of them are captured by the riders and seperated; Twoflower is able to summon a dragon greater than those of the Wyrmberg riders because of his fascination with dragons, and meets Greicha, the Wyrmberg's ruler. Rincewind finds Kring, Hrun's sentient sword, and later fights Lio!rt, one of Greicha's sons, and is saved from death by Twoflower and his dragon. Hrun meanwhile meets Liessa, Greicha's daughter, who convinces him to go through three trials so that he may rule the Wyrmberg alongside her. Hrun passes the first two trials: surviving an assassination attempt, and defeating both of Liessa's brothers. Before he can start the third one, implied to involve sex with Liessa, he is rescued by Twoflower, much to his annoyance. Hrun subsequently leaves the group to live with Liessa, while Rincewind and Twoflower end up far away from the Wyrmberg.
They nearly go over the waterfall on the edge of the Disc, only to be rescued and taken to the country of Krull , a city perched on the very edge of the Discworld inhabited by hydrophobic wizards. The Krullians wish to discover the gender of Great A'Tuin, the giant turtle which carries the Discworld through space, so they have built a space capsule to launch over the Edge. Their intent is to sacrifice Rincewind and Twoflower to get Fate to smile on the voyage. Instead, Rincewind, Twoflower and Tethis the sea troll hijack the capsule in an attempt to escape and are launched off the Disc themselves. The story segues immediately into the beginning of The Light Fantastic ; the two books can therefore be seen as one two-volume novel.
