Industrial Magic, the fourth in the Women of the Otherworld series, is a fantasy novel written by Canadian author Kelley Armstrong. It features the witch Paige Winterbourne.
Griffin - Ferratus Half-demon bodyguard of Benicio
Hector Cortez - Eldest son of Benicio
Jim - Half-Demon Cortez Cabal employee who previously worked for St Clouds.
Morris - Half-demon bodyguard for Benicio.
Randy MacArthur - Exaudio Half-Demon employed by Cortez Cabal
Reuben Aldrich - Necromancer and Head of Actuarial Department
Simon - Shaman working for Cortez Cabal
Troy Morgan - Tempestras Half-demon employed by Benicio as bodyguard
William Cortez - Middle son of Benicio Cortez
Aaron - Vampire and former lover of Cassandra.
Adam Vasic - Exustio Half-demon and friend of Paige.
Brigid - Vampire
Cassandra DuCharme - Vampire on Inter-Racial Council.
Clayton Danvers - Werewolf and lover of Elena.
Elena Michaels - Female werewolf and friend of Paige.
Eve Levine - Witch, Aspicio Half-demon and mother of Savannah. Now dead.
Esus - Druid deity. God of woodland and water.
Fates, The - Deities in charge of the afterlife (see Moirai )
Jaime Vegas - Necromancer
Jeremy Danvers - Pack's Alpha Werewolf
John - Vampire also known as Hans.
Julie Aiken - Witch and younger sister of Wendy
Lionel St Cloud - Head of St Cloud Cabal
Natasha - Ghost vampire.
Robert Vasic - Half-demon, husband of Talia and stepfather of Adam.
Ronald - Vampire.
Sean Nast - Son of Kristof Nast and Savannah's half-brother.
Talia Vasic - Mother of Adam and Wife of Robert.
Thomas Nast - Head of Nast Cabal.
Wendy Aiken - Witch
Dana MacArthur - Witch, Daughter of Randy MacArthur
Jacob - Son of Griffin
Matthew Tucker - 19 year old son of Lionel St Cloud's personal assistant
Everett Weber - Druid and Cabal Computer specialist. Executed by Cabals after being found (incorrectly) guilty of attacks on Cabal children.
Joey Nast - Grandson of Thomas Nast. Killed outside courthouse after Everett's execution.
Tyler Boyd - 17 year old son of Boyd Cabal CEO
Stephen St Cloud - Son of Lionel St Cloud
Edward - Vampire lover of the now deceased Natasha, both immortality questers.
Allusions/references to other works
Kelley Armstrong says the inspiration for the Cabals was "a cross between the Mafia and a corporation, kind of a tongue in cheek poke at corporate North America." [1]
Jaime is looking for a copy of Christine by Stephen King when she is attacked by copies of 'Salem's Lot and the Iliad .
Mentioned obliquely as "that damned writer" (p. 302), Anne Rice and The Vampire Chronicles are blamed for the New Orleans vampires considering themselves to be 'special'.
Michael Corleone of The Godfather movies is held up as a comparison to Lucas' own position within the Cortez cabal.
Allusions/references to actual history, geography and current science
Esus , known in this novel as the god of woodland and water, was a Gaulish god known from two monumental statues and a line in Lucan 's Bellum civile .
The World Trade Center in New York , which was one of the foci of the September 11, 2001 attacks is referred to (p. 240) as the home of the Nast Cabal's New York Office:
"Until last month, the Nasts' New York office was in the World Trade Center."
"Did they lose-?"
"Twenty-seven people, out of a staff of thirty-five..."
Awards and nominations
Romantic Time Reviewers Choice Award 'Best Contemporary Paranormal' 2004
Sources, references, external links, quotations
Author's website
"Set in a supernatural but credible underworld of industrial baron sorcerers and psychologically crippled witches... breakneck action is tempered by deep psychological insights, intense sensuality and considerable humor." - Publishers Weekly
"Dark, snappy, and consistently entertaining... Armstrong never loses the balance between Paige's sardonic narration, the wonderfully absurd supporting characters and the nicely girlie touches that add a little lightness to the murder and mayhem... There's never anything that could be described as a dull moment or filler for nearly 600 pages, that's quite an achievement. The series, in general, is developing into something more interesting and less predictable with every installment." -SF Crow's Nest
"Armstrong's world is dangerous and fun, her voice crisp and funny... a solidly engaging novel." -Contra Costa
"Not to be missed. The action is fantastic and the drama is very intense." -Huntress Reviews
"I found a lot to like in the humor and diversity of Armstrong's world." -Denver Post
"Industrial Magic is a book not to be missed. The action is fantastic and the drama is very intense. Kelly Armstrong creates such fun characters that really jump off the pages. The book is fast paced with a lot of unexpected turns. Like the other books in the series, I wanted more after reading Industrial magic." -SFsite.com
"One of Armstrong's strengths is the creation of plausible characters, which is a real bonus in a series based on the premise that there are supernatural beings walking and working beside us in our contemporary world. Industrial Magic is a page turner and very hard to put down." -Bookslut.com
