The Mating Season is a novel by P. G. Wodehouse, first published in the United Kingdom on September 9, 1949 by Herbert Jenkins, London, and in the United States on November 29, 1949 by Didier & Co. , New York. It stars Bertie Wooster and his valet Jeeves. It is the second installment of the Totleigh Towers saga, chronicling Bertie's continuing difficulties with Madeline Bassett.
Ring for Jeeves
The Mating Season is a novel by P. G. Wodehouse , first published in the United Kingdom on 9 September 1949 by Herbert Jenkins , London, and in the United States on November 29, 1949 by Didier & Co. , New York. [1] It stars Bertie Wooster and his valet Jeeves . It is the second installment of the Totleigh Towers saga, chronicling Bertie's continuing difficulties with Madeline Bassett .
Plot
Bertie Wooster and Gussie Fink-Nottle swap their identities, while Catsmeat Potter-Pirbright pretends to be the faux-Gussie's valet Meadowes and Jeeves pretends to be the faux-Bertie's valet, before complications ensue.
Together, they find themselves at the Aunt-ridden Deverill Hall , Hampshire , seat of the imposing Dame Daphne Winkworth , where Gussie's on-off engagement to Madeline Bassett is once again in danger, leaving Bertie at risk of becoming reattached to her. Bertie must also defend his friend Catsmeat's girl Gertrude Winkworth, daughter of Dame Daphne, from the attentions of the attractive Esmond Haddock, while avoiding fulfilling his Aunt Agatha 's wish that he marry her himself...
All of Jeeves' considerable powers are required to bring things to a satisfactory conclusion.
The story was adapted during the 1990-1993 British TV series Jeeves and Wooster (episode #15 "Right Ho! Jeeves", fourth of season three, aired 19 April 1992 in the UK). [2]
The story contains a synopsis of Mervyn Keene, Clubman which is the most complete example of the works of Rosie M. Banks ever given in the works of Wodehouse. Its recitation by Madeline Bassett leaves hearer Bertie Wooster in a state of dazed horror.
At the time of writing there was bad blood between Wodehouse and fellow author A. A. Milne . The book included several satirical jibes aimed at Milne, for instance after Bertie (pressured by Madeline Bassett) agrees to recite Christopher Robin poems at the village concert, he laments: "A fellow who comes on a platform and starts reciting about Christopher Robin going hoppity-hoppity-hop (or alternatively saying his prayers) does not do so from sheer wantonness but because he is a helpless victim of circumstances beyond his control." [3]
References and sources
References
^ McIlvaine, E., Sherby, L.S. and Heineman, J.H. (1990) P.G. Wodehouse: A comprehensive bibliography and checklist. New York: James H. Heineman, pp. 83-84. ISBN 087008125X
^ http://wodehouse.ru/dt310896.htm
Sources
Kuzmenko, Michel (The Russian Wodehouse Society) (2005-11-11 update). "Wodehouse books: The Mating Season" . Bibliography. Archived from the original on 2006-02-19.  Check date values in:
|date=
Reggie (2007-06-08 update). "Wodehouse novels: The Mating Season" . Blandings, a Companion to the Works of P. G. Wodehouse. Archived from the original on 2007-07-24.  Check date values in:
|date=
