The Family from One End Street is a realistic English children's novel, written and illustrated by Eve Garnett and published by Frederick Muller in 1937. Set in a small Sussex town, it was considered innovative and groundbreaking for its portrayal of a working-class family in a genre dominated by middle-class stories. Yet it is "a classic story of life in a big, happy family. " Garnett and The Family won the second annual Carnegie Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's outstanding children's book by a British subject. (It beat Tolkien's The Hobbit among others. ) For the 70th anniversary of the Medal it was named one of the top ten winning works, selected by a panel to compose the ballot for a public election of the all-time favourite. It is regarded as a classic, having remained in print to the present day. There were two sequels, Further Adventures of the Family from One End Street in 1956 and Holiday at the Dew Drop Inn in 1962, subtitled "A One End Street story" in the U.S. Collectively the three novels are sometimes called the "One End Street" series.
Setting
The Ruggles family lives at No. 1 One End Street in the heart of Otwell, located on the Ouse river. Otwell-on-the-Ouse is a fictional town resembling Lewes , Sussex, where the author lived.
Josiah Ruggles works for Otwell council as a dustman and his wife Rosie takes in washing. They have seven children, so life is hard, but they are a happy family.
CILIP, successor to the Library Association, assigns the subject tags "family large roisterous" and "family working class" in its online presentation of the Carnegie Medal winning books. [2]
Mr. Josiah Ruggles, a dustman
Mrs. Rosie Ruggles, a washerwoman ; wife of Mr. Ruggles
Their children: William, Margaret Rose (aka Peggy), Jo (after his father), James and John (the twins), Kate and Lily Rose
Reverend Theobald, the Vicar , who helps the Ruggles choose the names of their offspring.
Mrs. Theobald, the Vicar's wife, who assists in the provision of clothes for the Ruggles' newborn.
Mrs. Beaseley, a well-trusted client of Mrs. Ruggles' services.
Miss Patricia Watkins, Kate's school friend.
Mr. Watkins, Patricia's father, the owner of a nearby newspaper and tobacco shop.
Mr. Sid Watkins, Patricia's uncle.
Mrs. Watkins, Mr. Watkins' sister-in-law.
Bill and Ted, two brothers from whose advice Kate tries to earn money from mushroom collecting.
Mr. Henry Oates, the leader (and "Captain") of the Black Hand Gang.
Mr. Henry Lawrence, the owner of the grey car that John hides in to shelter out hail.
Mrs. Lawrence, his wife.
The Fierce One, a guest at the birthday party to which John is invited.
Mrs. Mullet, Mrs. Ruggles' friend.
Mr. George Bird, Mr. Ruggles' working partner.
Albert Bird, George's father.
Mrs. Hare, the cleaner at the Majestic Cinema.
Mr. Hare, her husband.
Miss Clements, Jo Ruggles Jr.'s teacher.
Charlie Ruggles, Mr. Ruggles' London brother.
Mr. Short, the author whose money goes into the hands of Mr. Ruggles and Mr. Bird.
Mr. Walter Wilkins, journalist for the Otwell Gazette .
Mrs. "Nosey Parker" Smith, a neighbour of the Ruggles.
Mrs. Charlie Ruggles (aka Auntie Ivy), Mr. Ruggles' sister-in-law.
Mrs. Mabel Perkins, Auntie Ivy's sister.
Leslie Perkins, a cabinet carpenter , and Mabel's husband.
Their children: Anthony Perkins (aged 7) and Pamela Perkins (aged 9).
Charlie Ruggles' children: May and Doris (twins, aged 10), Franklin (aged 9) and Elfred (aged 6).
Mr. and Mrs. Buckle, Uncle Charlie's neighbours. Mr. Buckle is a retired coal- cart driver.
Plot
Lily Rose's ironing incident
Lily Rose comes home early after a pipe has burst at school, and being a Girl Guide , Lily Rose tries to help her mother by ironing some of the laundry her mother does for clients. Unfortunately, she uses a too-hot iron for a petticoat of artificial silk, which shrinks, and her mother is furious as the garment belonged to one of her most trusted customers, Mrs. Beaseley.
The next morning, Mrs. Ruggles takes Lily Rose to Mrs Beaseley's house to explain what has happened. Fortunately, Mrs. Beaseley is amused, as she has made similar mistakes when she was a child.
Kate’s summer
Kate has passed her 'eleven plus' examinations with flying colours, but her parents are concerned, as they believe that they cannot afford the extra school expenses this will incur. Mrs. Beaseley's cook points out that Mr. Ruggles has filled the scholarship paperwork out incorrectly: instead of seven children, he stated that he had only one child. After correcting the paperwork, they get a larger scholarship.
The week before school opens, Kate is invited on an outing to the seaside by one of her school friends, and manages to lose her new school hat to the incoming tide. She cannot ask her family for another, as she wasn't supposed to be wearing it on the picnic, nor does she have enough money to buy one. Two local boys, Bill and his brother Ted, tell her where she can pick mushrooms and sell them for a shilling a pound.
Unfortunately, they are not wild mushrooms but cultivated ones, and the farmer catches Kate with a basket of his mushrooms. He asks her if she's stolen mushrooms before and she tearfully tells him how she found out about them. The farmer believes her, and is understanding enough to give her a basket of mushrooms to sell. After Kate goes back home, a surprise awaits her in a parcel: the hat she had lost at sea during the Salthaven (i.e. Newhaven, Sussex) outing has been recovered by a friend of the Watkins!
Jim and the Black Hands
Jim, the older and more ambitious of the Ruggles twins, decides he wants an adventure of his own, but is captured by a local gang. A twelve-year-old named Henry Oates heads this gang, whose members call themselves Black Hands. The gang meets every Saturday, in an old lime kiln or at the gasworks , where Henry's father, a foreman, is employed. Though they consider him too young to join and accuse him of spying, Jim begs for his acceptance.
The next Saturday, Jim embarks on a real adventure. As a hailstorm begins, he follows a friendly little dog into a drain pipe around a wharf ’s barge -loading area for shelter; the dog escapes but Jim, who has fallen asleep in the pipe, is carried off to the seaport Salthaven, when the pipes are loaded onto a barge.
Jim relates his story to Mr. Watkins about being a stowaway . To Jim's surprise, Watkins says he was also a gang member when he was young, and sends him off home.
John and the Lawrences
John, the younger twin, is a car fan and regularly visits Otwell Castle's car park , in the hope of finding visitors who will pay him to mind their car. A couple called the Lawrences arrive at the castle, and allow him to 'mind' their car. The same rainstorm which sends Jim into the pipe on the wharf for shelter catches John, and he climbs into the car for shelter.
When the Lawrences return, they drive away without checking the back seat, and John does not awaken until they've driven some miles. Instead of turning around and taking him home, they invite him to their son's birthday party, and promise to send a telegram to his family to let the Ruggles know that John is safe.
Aside from a slight mishap with the shower, John enjoys the party. There is a huge coffee-chocolate cake, and games. The Lawrences send John home on the bus with several parcels of leftover goodies from the festivities.
The Baby Show
William, the youngest Ruggles child, is entered in the Annual Baby Show, but the family is concerned as he is a late teether. He wins his age category (6–12 months), yet a slightly older competitor wins the Grand Challenge Cup as he has teeth. The Ruggles return home only to find that William now has a tooth!
Jo and the Majestic
Jo Ruggles Jr., a Mickey Mouse fan, spends his fourpence allowance at the local Majestic Theater to see cartoons. One week, he goes to the theatre, only to find that the next Symphony is due in a fortnight. He sneaks inside the empty building and hides in the orchestra pit, where he soon falls asleep; several hours later, several cinema musicians find him. Jo explains to them why he sneaked in, and the men give him sixpence for the show, and a warning not to do it again.
Mr. Ruggles' discovery
Mr. Ruggles has always wanted to take his family to London for the great Cart-Horse Parade in Regent's Park , but cannot afford it. One week, he and his co-worker find an envelope with £41 in one of the dustbins on their route. They turn the money in to the police, and a week later, the author Mr.Short gives him a reward of £2, which he uses to take his family to the Cart-Horse Parade.
At Regent's Park
The Ruggles travel to Regent's Park , the venue for the Cart Horse Parade, where they meet the family members who have entered their horse in the competition. The horse, 'Bernard Shaw', takes first place, and the families climb into the cart to participate in the parade.
A Perfect Day ends
The Ruggles spend the afternoon at a " Posh " tea shop while Charlie is stabling his horse. They spend longer than they realise amidst the delights of ice cream , sundaes and orchestra music, and must rush off to the train station. They make it just in time, and as the train pulls out, Mr. Ruggle's brother plays The End of a Perfect Day on his mouth organ .
Publication history
The Family From One End Street was rejected as unsuitable by several other publishers before taken by Muller.
The US Library of Congress gives a longer title, The Family from One End street and some of their adventures, for its oldest holding, a 1939 UK edition. [1]
Recent British editions have been published by Puffin . Indeed, The Family first appeared as a Puffin Book in 1942, only a year after the imprint was first used.
ISBN 0-14-030007-4 (Puffin, UK, late 1980s reprint)
