The Fires of Heaven (abbreviated as tFoH or FoH by fans) is the fifth book in American author Robert Jordan's fantasy series The Wheel of Time. It was published by Tor Books and released on October 15, 1993. It's notable for being the first novel in the series to not involve an appearance by each of the three ta'veren from the Two Rivers, due to Perrin's absence. The Fires of Heaven consists of a prologue and 56 chapters. The Fires of Heaven {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=Original cover of The Fires of Heaven|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}Original cover of The Fires of Heaven, showing Mat, Rand, and AviendhaAuthor(s) Robert JordanCover artist Darrell K. SweetCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishSeries The Wheel of TimeGenre(s) FantasyPublisher Tor Books (U.S. ) and [Orbit Books] (UK)Publication date October 15, 1993Media type PrintPages 704 pp (U.S. hardback edition)ISBN ISBN 0-312-85427-7 (US hardback edition)OCLC Number 29136140Dewey Decimal 813/.54 20LC Classification PS3560.O7617 F57 1993Preceded by The Shadow RisingFollowed by Lord of Chaos
Plot summary
Chasing the Shaido Aiel , who have crossed over the Spine of the World and are pillaging Cairhien , Rand al'Thor , the Dragon Reborn and the Car'a'carn, leads his Aiel over the Spine as well. The two Aiel armies meet in the Second Battle of Cairhien, which is by far the largest battle in the Westland since the time of Artur Hawkwing, 1000 years past. At the start of the battle, Mat Cauthon saves some troops from a Shaido ambush. Guiding these troops throughout the day, he wins numerous battles using the memories of past generals he received in The Shadow Rising . He personally kills the Shaido leader, Couladin, in battle, and the Shaido Aiel retreat in defeat.
Falsely believing Queen Morgase Trakand of Andor died at the hands of the Forsaken , Rahvin , who is masquerading as Lord Gaebril, an angry Rand prepares to Travel to Caemlyn with a small Aiel strike force. Before he can do so, Lanfear , learning that Rand slept with Aviendha , is furious with jealousy and attempts to kill them. Moiraine Damodred grabs Lanfear and both topple through the doorframe ter'angreal that Mat used in the waste. After they fall through, the ter'angreal is damaged by fire and destroyed. Both Moiraine and Lanfear are presumed dead.
Rand attacks Caemlyn, and Mat, Asmodean and Aviendha go with him as well. Shortly after arrival, Rand's companions are killed by Rahvin's wielding of the One Power. Rand begins a desperate, fury driven chase to eradicate Rahvin in Tel'aran'rhiod , after the Forsaken opens a portal of sorts leading to there. After a lengthy chase and duel, and with Nynaeve's unexpected assistance, Rand destroys Rahvin with a tremendous burst of balefire , erasing Rahvin's actions he undertook whilst killing Mat, Aviendha and Asmodean. Afterwards, Asmodean is killed by an unknown figure right after a shock of recognition.
Meanwhile, Nynaeve al'Meara and Elayne Trakand travel through lands filled with Seanchan left behind from the battle at Toman Head, Dragonsworn , bandits , and Whitecloaks , attempting to find the base of the rebel Aes Sedai . Nynaeve finally remembers that the rebel Aes Sedai are in Salidar; after they arrive, Nynaeve is able to trap the Forsaken Moghedien in Tel'aran'rhiod with the use of an a'dam . In Tel'aran'rhiod, Nynaeve goes to Caemlyn where she finds Rahvin. She distracts him with fire, giving Rand a chance to finish him off.
