The Path of Daggers (abbreviated as tPoD by fans) is the eighth book of The Wheel of Time fantasy series written by American author Robert Jordan. It was published by Tor Books and released on October 20, 1998. Upon its release, it immediately rose to the #1 position on the New York Times hardcover fiction bestseller list, making it the first Wheel of Time book to reach the #1 position on that list. It remained on the list for the next two months. This book is the shortest book in the main Wheel of Time series, consisting of a prologue and 31 chapters. The title of the book is a reference to a Seanchan saying: "On the heights, all paths are paved with daggers."
Winter's Heart
The Path of Daggers (abbreviated as tPoD by fans) is the eighth book of The Wheel of Time fantasy series written by American author Robert Jordan . It was published by Tor Books and released on October 20, 1998. Upon its release, it immediately rose to the #1 position on the New York Times hardcover fiction bestseller list , making it the first Wheel of Time book to reach the #1 position on that list. It remained on the list for the next two months. This book is the shortest book in the main Wheel of Time series, consisting of a prologue and 31 chapters.
The title of the book is a reference to a Seanchan saying: "On the heights, all paths are paved with daggers."
Plot summary
Elayne Trakand , Nynaeve al'Meara , Aviendha , and their coalition of channelers use the ter'angreal called the Bowl of the Winds to reverse the unnatural heat brought on by the Dark One 's manipulation of the climate and then escape a Seanchan invasion by Traveling to Andor , where Elayne initiates her claim to the Lion Throne.
Perrin Aybara moves into Ghealdan in an attempt to stop Masema Dagar, the self-proclaimed Prophet of the Dragon. He unknowingly rescues Deposed Queen Morgase of Andor (who now goes by the name of Maighdin and becomes Faile's servant), from the Prophet's men. He then secures the oath of fealty from Alliandre, Queen of Ghealdan. At the end of the book, Faile Bashere is kidnapped by the Shaido Aiel.
Egwene al'Vere , Amyrlin Seat of the rebel Aes Sedai , finally manipulates her unruly followers into giving her more control, and they Travel to Tar Valon , preface to their siege of the White Tower .
Rand al'Thor , with Asha'man and Illianers , attempts to repel the Seanchan invasion in Altara . Though successful in early skirmishes, things go awry later, when Rand uses Callandor on the Seanchan army. Since he was fatigued from wounds and channeling, and both halves of the One Power are behaving erratically in the area following the use of the Bowl of the Winds, as well as an inherent instability in Callandor , Rand loses control while wielding Callandor, causing much destruction to both armies and forcing a stalemate. Returning to Cairhien, Rand is attacked by traitorous Asha'man led by Dashiva , who attempt and fail to kill him.
Mat Cauthon is absent from the book, due to injuries sustained at the end of the previous book, A Crown of Swords . Robert Jordan had earlier done the same for Perrin Aybara , who had been absent from Book 5, The Fires of Heaven .
1998, U.S., Tor Books ( ISBN 0-312-85769-1 ), Pub date October 20, 1998, hardcover (First edition)
1998, UK, Orbit ( ISBN 1-85723-554-1 ), Pub date October 29, 1998, hardcover
1999, UK, Orbit ( ISBN 1-85723-569-X ), Pub date September 2, 1999, paperback
1999, U.S., Tor Books ( ISBN 0-8125-5029-3 ), Pub date December ?, 1999, paperback
1999, U.S., Rebound by Sagebrush ( ISBN 0-613-22158-3 ), Pub date December ?, 1999, hardcover (Library binding)
