The Royal Family is a play written by George S. Kaufman and Edna Ferber. Its premiere on Broadway was at the Selwyn Theatre on 28 December 1927, where it ran for 345 performances to close in October 1928.
Fanny Cavendish - Cavendish Family Matriarch
Oscar Wolfe - Cavendish Family's Long-time Agent
Gilmore Marshall - Julie's Love Interest
Perry Stewart - Gwen's Fiancee
The story is a parody of the Barrymore family of actors, with particular aim taken at John Barrymore and Ethel Barrymore . The character Tony Cavendish, a heavy-drinking womanizer , represents John Barrymore . Julie Cavendish is the prima donna Broadway star Ethel Barrymore . Ethel Barrymore was offended and her critical comments were quoted by the press; however John Barrymore saw the production in Los Angeles and was amused, and congratulated Fredric March on his performance as Tony Cavendish. ( Otto Kruger had played the role on Broadway.)
Productions
In England, Noël Coward directed the West End version of the play in 1934, with a cast that included Laurence Olivier as Tony.
Before moving to Broadway, the play had successful out-of-town try-outs in Newark and Atlantic City .
The Royal Family opened one day after the revolutionary musical Show Boat , based on Ferber's novel of the same title .
Edna Ferber herself acted in The Royal Family at the Maplewood Theater in 1940, in a production staged by Cheryl Crawford
A revival of the comedy was one of the highlights of the 1975-76 season on Broadway. Directed by Ellis Rabb , it starred Rosemary Harris as Julie Cavendish, George Grizzard as Tony, and Eva Le Gallienne as the theatrical matriarch, Fanny. It won Rabb the 1976 Tony Award for best director. The production was later telecast on PBS , with Rabb replacing Grizzard as Tony, and this version is now on DVD .
The play was revived as part of Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre 's 2001-02 season with Amy Morton and Rondi Reed in the cast.
Another revival ran from September to December 2009 at the Samuel J. Friedman Theatre . It starred Rosemary Harris as Fanny, Jan Maxwell as Julie Cavendish, and Ana Gasteyer as Kitty Dean.
Main article: The Royal Family of Broadway
The play was adapted in 1930 by Herman Mankiewicz for the film The Royal Family of Broadway released by Paramount Pictures . The film was directed by George Cukor and Cyril Gardner and stars Ina Claire and Fredric March . Several live television adaptions were produced, including one in 1952, a BBC film for television, starring Morton Lowry as Tony Cavendish and Charmion King as Julia, renamed as 'Theatre Royal' [1] and one in 1954, with Fredric March reprising his role as Tony, Helen Hayes as Fanny, and Claudette Colbert as Julie.
Awards and nominations
