Freckle Juice is a 1971 children's book by Judy Blume. This short story is about Andrew Marcus, a second grade student, who wants to look like Nicky Lane.
LC Class
MLCS 2006/13892 (P)
Summary
Andrew's dream is to have freckles. He envies Nicky Lane because he has numerous freckles all over his face, ears, and neck. Andrew feels as if he is at a disadvantage because he only has two warts on his fingers. Once, he tried counting all of Nicky's freckles, but when he got to eighty-six, Miss Kelly, Andrew's teacher, told him to pay attention. He wants to have his own so his mother won't be able to tell if his neck and face are dirty and he wouldn't have to wash them. He makes many attempts to acquire some. He thinks that they are really neat.
After asking Nicky how he got his freckles, and getting the expected answer ("you get born with them"), a girl in his class named Sharon, who often fools him by using sneaky tricks, tells him he can get some by drinking a concoction that she claims she used to do so. At first, he doesn't believe her. She then tells him to look closely and he observes that she has six on her nose. She gives him the recipe for "Freckle Juice" for fifty cents. He thinks it's ridiculous that he has to use five weeks worth of allowance for it, but he is dying to get freckles. After school, he runs home to make the recipe which calls for several disgusting ingredients (some of which he didn't have and had to use substitutes). He ends up drinking it, after which he gets very sick. His mother comes home, notices how sick he looks, and puts him to bed immediately. She gives him pink medicine which tastes like peppermint to get better. That night he has a nightmare about being bullied by a monster which looks like a gigantic Sharon, who forces him to drink quarts of Freckle Juice, but only makes it get some. Because he still feels queasy, Andrew stays home from school the following morning, but gradually recovers that afternoon. The following day he is healthy enough to go back to school, but must think of a way to convince Sharon he got freckles.
Before he goes to school, Andrew tries to find a brown marker but can't find one so he used a blue one to draw several little dots on his face. He believes this will make him look like he got freckles, which would prove Sharon wrong. He realizes that her recipe was only a joke to fool him. He is angry and frustrated because he was the victim of a prank. Unfortunately, everybody, including Sharon, sees through this idea and ends up laughing at him.
Miss Kelly gives Andrew her secret formula for removing freckles. It seems to be a powerful lemony soap that cleanses marker stains. Ironically, Nicky asks her if he could use it as well because he hates his. She explains freckles didn't look good on Andrew, but are fine on him and that she hopes it will never be used again. Later, Sharon whispers to him about this recipe for a concoction that can get rid of his freckles. Andrew takes pleasure when she makes a big frog face at him.
Reviews
"This convincing small boy adventure proceeds smoothly to a satisfying conclusion. The conniving little girl, understanding teacher, and feckless, freckleless boy are amusingly depicted in the impish black-and-white illustrations and in the story which is especially suited for reading aloud to second-and third-graders." - Library Journal.
"Spontaneous humor, sure to appeal to the youngest reader. The amusing sketches and the well-spaced type make an inviting volume." - The Horn Book
