The Fiery Cross is book five in the best-selling Outlander series, written by Diana Gabaldon. The stories center around a time-travelling 20th-century doctor (Claire Randall Fraser) and her 18th-century Scottish husband (Jamie Fraser), and are located in Scotland, France, and America. The heroine of Outlander, Claire, returns in The Fiery Cross as a reluctant oracle and wife to Jamie Fraser, her 18th century partner, and facing the politics and turmoil of the forthcoming American Revolution. As the preceding novel, Drums of Autumn, concluded with Jamie Fraser and his wife Claire helping their daughter and new son-in-law, from the 20th century, settle into life on Fraser's Ridge, The Fiery Cross picks up the storyline exactly where it was left - with Brianna Ellen Randall Fraser and Roger Mackenzie about to make their nuptials official and baptise their son Jeremiah. With the American Revolution now only a few years away and unrest brewing Jamie is called to form a militia to put down the beginnings of rebellion in North Carolina, and risking his life for a king he knows he must betray - and soon. Gabaldon delivers the endings to several strands of storyline she had woven through Drums of Autumn; mysterious plots and characters are revealed in the course of this intricate plot - leaving the Frasers and their family poised on the edge of war.
A Breath of Snow and Ashes
The Fiery Cross is book five in the best-selling Outlander series, written by Diana Gabaldon . The stories center around a time-travelling 20th-century doctor (Claire Randall Fraser) and her 18th-century Scottish husband (Jamie Fraser), and are located in Scotland, France, and America.
The heroine of Outlander, Claire, returns in The Fiery Cross as a reluctant oracle and wife to Jamie Fraser, her 18th century partner, and facing the politics and turmoil of the forthcoming American Revolution. As the preceding novel, Drums of Autumn , concluded with Jamie Fraser and his wife Claire helping their daughter and new son-in-law, from the 20th century, settle into life on Fraser's Ridge, The Fiery Cross picks up the storyline exactly where it was left - with Brianna Ellen Randall Fraser and Roger Mackenzie about to make their nuptials official and baptise their son Jeremiah. With the American Revolution now only a few years away and unrest brewing Jamie is called to form a militia to put down the beginnings of rebellion in North Carolina, and risking his life for a king he knows he must betray - and soon. Gabaldon delivers the endings to several strands of storyline she had woven through Drums of Autumn; mysterious plots and characters are revealed in the course of this intricate plot - leaving the Frasers and their family poised on the edge of war.
