Flyte is the second book in the Septimus Heap series by Angie Sage. The cover is modeled after the in-story book: How to Survive Dragon Fostering: A Practykal Guide with the Flyte Charm lying on top. The book was released worldwide on March 2006. The book received positive reviews from critics and even appeared on the New York Times Best Sellers list for 2006.
Plot
Septimus has become the apprentice to Marcia Overstrand, the ExtraOrdinary Wizard and a year has gone by. Septimus' older brother, Simon, had run away after an argument between him and Sarah/Silas Heap about Septimus, who Simon disliked. He comes back and kidnaps Jenna on his horse, Thunder. Septimus goes to search for her and he is assisted in his search by his brother Nicko, who helps build boats at Jannit Maarten's boatyard. But Jenna runs away from Simon's observatory in The Badlands and makes her way towards The Port. Eventually Septimus is able to rescue Jenna with his elder brother Nicko 's help from the Port but they are tracked by Sleuth, Simon's tracking ball.
They make their way to the Marram Marshes where they take the Dragon-Boat from Aunt Zelda 's cottage and fly her to the Castle. However, they are pursued by Simon, who used a Flyte Charm to fly in the sky. Simon drops a huge Thunderflash on the Dragon-Boat's wing and it drops over Jannit Marten 's Boatyard. Septimus, Jenna and Aunt Zelda are able to revive her through the Transubstantiation Triple spell.
Septimus is also in search of the long lost Flyte charm. He finds the separated charm and unites it along with the small pair-of-wings Flyte charm that Marcia had given him as a token for his apprenticeship. Eventually he is able to fly and even warns Simon never to harm Jenna again. Also, the rock that Jenna gave him at Aunt Zelda's cottage turns out to be the egg of a dragon and eventually it hatches. Septimus absolutely adores the dragon and names him Spit Fyre . The dragon, based on the seeing-is-believing basis, identifies Marcia as his mother after yelling at him on the dragon launch pad.
Septimus rescues Marcia by identifying the shadow that has been trailing her. He also finds out that the ShadowSafe Marcia is developing contains, unbeknown to her, the bones of destroyed Necromancer DomDaniel , which, once reassembled, tried to kill Marcia. With Septimus's help, Marcia is able to Identify him and he is once again destroyed.
Other characters
Marcia Overstrand : The current ExtraOrdinary Wizard. An extremely powerful wizard, Marcia is known for her short tempers and ambition. She has Septimus as her apprentice.
Alther Mella : The ex-ExtraOrdinary Wizard whose ghost now helps Septimus to look for Jenna and also gives advice to Marcia.
DomDaniel : Ex-ExtraOrdinary wizard and Necromancer. DomDaniel was destroyed by Marcia in Magyk , but his bones were placed in Marcia's ShadowSafe to make a Placement on her.
Billy Pot: The Palace gardener who is also the inventor of the Contraption- a machine used as a lawn mower .
Ellis Crackle: Once an apprentice to DomDaniel. DomDaniel Reduced him into a Shadow.
Hugh Fox: The Chief Hermetic Scribe at Manuscriptorium. He has had secret dealings with Simon Heap. He is the one who gave Simon the half of the Flyte with Simon Heap.
Merrin Meredith : He thought he was Septimus Heap. He was once an apprentice to and then later Consumed by Necromancer DomDaniel. But Aunt Zelda saved him from being gone forever. He was apprenticed to Simon Heap near the end of the book.
Morwenna Mould: Current Witch Mother of the Wendron Witch Forest Coven.
Nurse Meredith: The landlady of the Doll House after Florrie Bundy, the old landlady, drowned in a drain after having a Shrink Spell done on her by Linda, one of the witches in the Port Witch Coven. She was the Matron Midwife who snatched Septimus Heap from Sarah for DomDaniel.
Lucy Gringe : She is in love with Simon Heap, and often fights with her parents about it, as they despise all Heaps.
Professor Weasal Van Klampff: The professor in charge of constructing the Shadow Safe.
Sleuth: The faithful servant to Simon Heap. He used to be a bald, old tennis ball in a dumpster, but then Simon dug him out and enchanted him.
Stanley : Once a message rat, he is now employed in the Secret Rat Service. He is sent to find Jenna when she is kidnapped.
Una Brakket: Weasal Van Klampff's grumpy housekeeper.
Gringe: Gate keeper
