Avalon High is a young adult novel by Meg Cabot, published in 2005. It reached number 3 on the The New York Times children's best sellers list in January 2006. Three manga volumes have been released: Coronation Volume 1: The Merlin Prophecy, Coronation Volume 2: Homecoming, and Coronation Volume 3: Hunter's Moon.
Plot
Ellie Harrison has just moved to Annapolis, Maryland. Her new school, Avalon High, seems like a typical high school with the stereotypical students: Lance the jock , Jennifer the cheerleader , Marco, the bad boy/desperado , and Will, the senior class president, quarterback, the student every girl wants and all around good guy. But not everyone at Avalon High is who they appear to be, not even Ellie herself.
Characters
Elaine "Ellie" Harrison: the new student at Avalon High—she moved to Annapolis, Maryland from Minnesota and represents the Lady of the Lake .
Arthur William "Will" Wagner: has a slightly disruptive family relationship at home and is a star quarterback for the Avalon High School Fighting Knights. He represents King Arthur .
Jennifer Gold: a cheerleader who corresponds to Queen Guinevere in the legend.
Lance Reynolds: the "jock" who is Will's best friend. He goes behind Will's back to cheat with Jennifer. Lance corresponds to Sir Lancelot
Marco: Marco is Will's step brother/ half brother. He is Mordred .
Mr Morton: High school teacher. He works for 'The order of the bear'. Mr M represents Merlin .
Admiral Arthur Wagner: He is Will's father and he corresponds to Uther Pendragon in the legend. He seemingly murders his best friend (by sending him into combat where he was killed) and then marries his wife.
Jean Wagner: Jean is Admiral Wagner's wife, who married him 6 months after her husband died in combat. Although originally it was believed that she was merely Will's stepmother, it was later revealed (by Mr. Morton) that she was in actuality Will's birth mother. She corresponds to Igraine in the legend.
Ellie's Parents: professors on sabbatical. Her mother is writing a book on Elaine, the so-called "lily maid" of Astolat, and her father is writing his on the sword that Ellie takes to the park and hands to Will during his face-off with Marco, thus revealing herself as the Lady of the Lake. Ellie's parents care about her despite being an embarrassment at times.
Miscellaneous
The book has twenty-nine chapters and each chapter starts with a quote, which relatively relates to the content of the chapter, from Alfred Lord Tennyson 's famous poem about Elaine the Lady of Shalott .
There is a subtle foreshadowing in the book's first chapter that points to Ellie being the Lady of the Lake, as opposed to the Lady of Shalott. Her home state, Minnesota, is known as "the Land of 10,000 Lakes".
