"The Children of the Night" is a 1931 short story by Robert E. Howard, belonging to the Cthulhu Mythos. It was first published in the pulp magazine Weird Tales in the April/May 1931 issue. Howard earned $60 for this publication.
Plot
The story starts with six people sitting in John Conrad's study: Conrad himself, Clemants, Professor Kirowan , Taverel, Ketrick and the narrator John O'Donnel. O'Donnel describes them all as Anglo-Saxon with the exception of Ketrick. Ketrick, although he possesses a documented pure Anglo-Saxon lineage, appears to have slightly Mongolian-looking eyes and an odd lisp that O'Donnel finds distasteful.
Initially the group discusses anthropology but begin to talk about Conrad's collection of books, which includes a copy of Von Junzt's Nameless Cults . This brings Clemants to discuss the Cult of Bran, mentioned in Nameless Cults and by his former University roommate in his sleep. The cult worships the Dark Man, an ancient king of the Picts called Bran Mak Morn . The others are skeptical but Conrad brings up a flint mallet found recently in the Welsh hills which is "obviously of no ordinary Neolithic make" - it is too small but still heavy, with odd shape and balance. While others handle the mallet, Ketrick accidentally strikes O'Donnel on the head and knocks him unconscious.
O'Donnel wakes in a forest wearing deer skins. He calls himself "Aryara" of the Sword People, one of the Aryan tribes of the time. His hunting party have been killed by a group of "Children of the Night", snake-like people the Aryans consider vermin. He kills several of them and follows a trail back to their village where he again attacks and kills many more. Aryara is killed in the process.
O'Donnel wakes up again back in Conrad's study but still remembering his life as Aryara. On seeing Ketrick he becomes enraged, believing him to be a descendant of the Children of the Night. The others restrain him and think he has gone mad with exclamations such as "You fools, he is marked with the brand of the beast--the reptile--the vermin we exterminated centuries ago! I must crush him, stamp him out, rid the clean earth of his accursed pollution!"
Ketrick leaves, but O'Donnel swears to hunt him down and kill him while, as is his habit, he is walking the moors alone at night, even if he will be hanged for it.
The Children of the Night
As Aryara, O'Donel describes the Children of the Night as:
Humans they were, of a sort, though I did not consider them so. They were short and stocky, with broad heads too large for their scrawny bodies. Their hair was snaky and stringy, their faces broad and square, with flat noses, hideously slanted eyes, a thin gash for a mouth, and pointed ears. They wore the skins of beasts, as did I, but these hides were but crudely dressed. They bore small bows and flint-tipped arrows, flint knives and cudgels. And they conversed in a speech as hideous as themselves, a hissing, reptilian speech that filled me with dread and loathing.
They are frequently described as snakes or having snake-like qualities. The Aryan legends say that the Children—none of the Aryans know what they call themselves—used to own the land in an ancient "outworn age" until they were hunted and driven underground by the Picts.
Links to other works of fiction
The story clearly links into the Cthulhu Mythos . At one point, the character Tavrel notes Lovecraft's " Call of Cthulhu " as one of the "three master horror-tales" alongside Poe's " The Fall of the House of Usher " and Machen's " Black Seal ". He later mentions, however, the historical existence of cults dedicated to "nameless and ghastly gods and entities as Cthulhu , Yog Sothoth , Tsathoggua , Gol-goroth, and the like". The Necronomicon is mentioned as a real book - both Conrad and Kirowan have read the Latin version. Nameless Cults is obviously real to the characters as it is on show on Conrad's bookshelf.
The story is also clearly linked to other stories in the works of Robert E. Howard . Bran Mak Morn and the cult of The Dark Man are explicitly mentioned. The Children of the Night may, from their description, be the Serpent Men of the Kull story " The Shadow Kingdom ", the "Worms" from the Bran story " Worms of the Earth ", or both.
^ Works of Robert E. Howard , retrieved 16 August 2007
^ REHupa , retrieved 20 August 2007
