Prelude to Foundation is a Locus Award nominated 1988 novel written by Isaac Asimov. It is one of two prequels to the Foundation series. For the first time, Asimov chronicles the fictional life of Hari Seldon, the man who invented psychohistory and the intellectual hero of the series.
Plot summary
The story takes place on Trantor during the reign of Emperor Cleon I . It starts with Hari's presentation of a paper at a mathematics convention detailing how practical use of psychohistory might theoretically be possible. The Emperor of the Galactic Empire learns of this and wants to use Hari for political gain. But an interview with Hari causes Cleon to conclude that Hari is of no use to the Empire.
Hari then meets reporter Chetter Hummin , who convinces him that Cleon's first minister, Eto Demerzel , is attempting to capture him, and that it is therefore imperative for Hari to escape and to try to make psychohistory practical. Thus, Hari goes on his "Flight" and is introduced to Dors Venabili by Hummin. Hari theorises that in order to make psychohistory work, he needs to find a small but significative sample, and that the best one would be the original world where humans originated...which is now lost to all but in a few histories.
Hari and Dors narrowly evade capture at Streeling University, following which the pair move to Mycogen . Hari and Dors are welcomed to Mycogen by Sunmaster Fourteen, the leader of Mycogen. Determined to work out his psychohistory with the knowledge that the Mycogenians supposedly possess, Hari decides to speak to a Mycogenian alone about history, hoping to find if their world was the original one as they claim. He manages this by convincing Raindrop Forty-Three to show him the prized Mycogenian microfarms, a prized source of food for the aristocracy and Mycogenians alike, then asking her to show her their religious historical book. Raindrop Forty-Three accepts on the condition that Hari allows her to touch his hair, hair being expressly forbidden in Mycogenian society. When Hari starts reading the book, he finds it disappointing except for the revelation of what the Mycogenians call their home planet, Aurora .
Hari and Dors are almost killed when they try to find what they suspect is a robot in the Mycogenian "temple," until Hummin arrives in the nick of time to save them. The action then shifts to the Dahl sector, where Dors displays her amazing knife-fighting skills. While in Dahl they meet a guttersnipe named Raych, whom Hari later adopts as his son. Also in Dahl, they are told by an old wise woman that the Aurora of the Mycogenians is not the original world, but actually the "enemy" that destroyed the original human planet, called Earth. (This links with the Robot series .)
Towards the end of the novel, Hari, Dors, and Raych are kidnapped by agents from Wye, a powerful sector situated at Trantor's south pole. There Hari has the revelation that he does not need the original planet, but that the best example to develop psychohistory would actually be Trantor itself, because of the great cultural diversity of its sectors. The finale reveals that "Hummin" is actually Cleon's first minister Eto Demerzel, who is later revealed to be, in reality, the robot R. Daneel Olivaw , who wants the development of psychohistory to help him protect humanity perpetually, as per "The Zeroth Law Of Robotics." By the end of the novel, Hari suspects that Dors is a robot, too. This theme would later be picked up in Forward the Foundation .
Character histories
Below is a list of all the major and minor characters in the book, in order of appearance, with plot detail.
Hari Seldon is the protagonist of the story. He develops the theory of psychohistory .
Cleon I is the Emperor of the Galactic Empire, who lives on Trantor.
Eto Demerzel, First Minister of the emperor, is sly, has connections everywhere, and attempts to capture Hari for his knowledge of psychohistory .
Chetter Hummin is a reporter who runs into Hari. He helps Hari numerous times, setting him up at various sectors to avoid Imperial detection.
Dors Venabili is a history professor at the University recruited by Hummin to protect Hari. She follows him throughout the book.
Jenarr Leggen is a meteorologist of the University who helps Dors track Hari using specialized equipment.
Rogen Benastra, a Chief Seismologist at Streeling University who helps Dors find Hari after he’s trapped Upperside.
Endor Levanian is the pilot who flies Dors and Hari to the Mycogen sector.
Sunmaster Fourteen is a High Elder of the Mycogen sector who greeted Dors and Hari.
Graycloud Five is a novitiate resident of the Mycogen sector.
Raindrop Forty-three and Raindrop Forty-five are two Sisters who instruct Dors on the operation of kitchen equipment.
Mycelium Seventy-Two is a Mycogenian scholar whom Hari and Dors met on the gravibus to the Sacratorium.
Skystrip Two is an Elder of the Sacratorium in Mycogen.
Jirad Tisalver is a resident working as a holovision programmer of the Dahl sector who takes Hari and Dors into his home.
Hano Linder is a heatsink manager of the Dahl sector.
Yugo Amaryl is a heatsink worker who aspires to be a mathematician like Hari.
Raych is a kid from Billibotton who helps Hari and Dors find their way around in exchange for rewards.
Mother Rittah is a local prophet of Billibotton in the Dahl sector who gives Hari information regarding Earth.
Da-Nee and Ba-Lee Refers to R. Daneel Olivaw and the Baley family, respectively (see below and in the Robot series article).
Davan is a subversive of Billibotton who aims to unite the downtrodden against the oppressive Empire.
Sergeant Emmer Thalus is a soldier instructed to bring Hari to the Wye sector.
Rashelle is the daughter of Mannix IV and current mayor of Wye.
R. Daneel Olivaw is the true name of Eto Demerzel and Chetter Hummin. The R stands for robot.
