The Dungeon Master's Guide II is a book of rules for the 3.5 edition of the Dungeons & Dragons seminal fantasy role-playing game.
Contents
Like the Dungeon Master's Guide it is focused on providing Dungeon Masters with assistance in running the game. It contains a number of chapters providing advice on the more difficult aspects of running a game as well as complex pregenerated characters (often using Prestige Classes ).
Player types
The DM Guide II introduces Dungeon Masters to various types of people who enjoy the D&D game, and it explains what exactly they enjoy.
Examples include:
Brilliant planner- A leader-type who is happiest when planning for the night's adventure
Cool guy- Player who likes to get cool powers and cool weapons
Lurker- Someone who is happiest when left to their own devices
Outlier- An oddball player who likes to see their character lose, seeing it as a victory more than a defeat
Psychodramatist- A player who likes exploring the background of his/her character, and would love to have a session centered around their character
This book was written by Jesse Decker , David Noonan , Chris Thomasson , James Jacobs , and Robin D. Laws , and was published in June 2005. Cover art is by Matt Cavotta , with interior art by Kalman Andrasofszky , Mitch Cotie , Ed Cox , Steve Ellis , Wayne England , Emily Fiegenschuh , Randy Gallegos , Brian Hagan , Ginger Kubic , Raven Mimura , William O'Connor , Michael Phillippi , Vinod Rams , Wayne Reynolds , Dan Scott , Ron Spencer , Arnie Swekel , and Franz Vohwinkel .
David Noonan explained that while this book offers words of wisdom on how to manage a game—or even a whole campaign—more creatively, and broadens the scope of adventuring to include more city and campaign-based material, he "wanted this book to have something for players too. Thus, the DMG II contains more magic items, plus some new rules elements designed for players, such as teamwork benefits and PC organizations". [1]
This is the first Dungeon Master's Guide II to be published; however, it was followed by the Player's Handbook II .
Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition
The 4th edition Dungeon Master's Guide 2 was released on September 19, 2009. It is a 224-page hardcover written by James Wyatt, Bill Slavicsek and Robin D. Laws. It contains information on group storytelling, advanced encounters, skill challenges, customizing monsters, adventures and paragon campaigns. Although it does contain artifacts, it does not contain standard magic items.
Reception
The reviewer from Pyramid commented that: "The Dungeon Master's Guide II is a supplementary volume intended to make the referee's job easier, but it achieves only mixed results." [2]
