Knuffle Bunny: A Cautionary Tale is a children's picture book by Mo Willems. Released by Hyperion Books in 2004, an illustrated version of the book won the 2005 Caldecott Honor. The story also spawned an animated short, which won the Carnegie Medal for Excellence in Children's Video in 2007. In August 2007, the sequel, Knuffle Bunny Too: A Case of Mistaken Identity was published. The sequel follows the main character, Trixie, from the original Knuffle Bunny, three years later. Finally, in September 2010, Knuffle Bunny Free: An Unexpected Diversion was released, completing the trilogy. The final instalment features an epilogue in which Willems sends a poignant message to his real daughter Trixie, wishing her well in her future as an adult. A 'Knuffle Bunny' plush has been released by the Yottoy Productions Inc. This book was also made into a musical by Mo Willems, Michael Silversher, and Deborah Wicks La Puma. It toured with the Kennedy Center to cities all across the United States.
LC Class
PZ7.W65535 Knu 2004
Knuffle Bunny: A Cautionary Tale is a children's picture book by Mo Willems . Released by Hyperion Books in 2004, an illustrated version of the book won the 2005 Caldecott Honor . The story also spawned an animated short, which won the Carnegie Medal for Excellence in Children's Video in 2007. In August 2007, the sequel, Knuffle Bunny Too: A Case of Mistaken Identity was published. The sequel follows the main character, Trixie, from the original Knuffle Bunny, three years later. Finally, in September 2010, Knuffle Bunny Free: An Unexpected Diversion was released, completing the trilogy. [1] [2] The final instalment features an epilogue in which Willems sends a poignant message to his real daughter Trixie, [3] wishing her well in her future as an adult.
A 'Knuffle Bunny' plush has been released by the Yottoy Productions Inc.
This book was also made into a musical of the same name by Mo Willems, Michael Silversher, and Deborah Wicks La Puma. [4] It toured with the Kennedy Center to cities all across the United States. [5]
Plot
Trixie steps lively as she goes with her father to the laundromat, down the block, through the park, past the school, to the Laundromat. For the toddler, loading and putting money into the machine invoke wide-eyed pleasure. But, on the return home, she realizes that her stuffed bunny has been left behind. Because she cannot talk, Trixie cannot explain why she is upset to her daddy. Despite his plea of "please don't get fussy," she gives it her all, bawling and going "boneless." They both arrive home unhappy. Mom immediately sees that "Knuffle Bunny" is missing. After several tries, dad finds the toy among the wet laundry and reclaims hero status. The toddler exuberantly exclaims, "Knuffle Bunny!!!"
