A Fire Upon the Deep is a science fiction novel by American writer Vernor Vinge, a space opera involving superhuman intelligences, aliens, variable physics, space battles, love, betrayal, genocide, and a conversation medium resembling Usenet. A Fire Upon the Deep won the Hugo Award in 1993. Besides the normal print book editions, the novel was also included on a CD-ROM sold by ClariNet Communications along with the other nominees for the 1993 Hugo awards. The CD-ROM edition included numerous annotations by Vinge on his thoughts and intentions about different parts of the book.
Setting
The novel is set in various locations in the Milky Way . The galaxy is divided into four concentric layers called the "Zones of Thought"; it is not clear to the novel's characters if this is a natural phenomenon or an artificially-produced one. The Zones most fundamentally constrain the type of intelligent being that can exist in each one, and secondarily determine whether certain advanced technologies will or will not function.
The Unthinking Depths are the innermost zone, surrounding the galactic core . In it, no forms of intelligence, biological or otherwise, are possible. This means that any ship straying into the Depths will be stranded effectively permanently, as neither crew nor technology will function.
Surrounding the Depths is the Slow Zone. (The Earth and its Solar System lie in this Zone, although they play no significant role in the story.) Biological intelligence is possible there, but not true artificial intelligence. Faster-than-light travel and communication are impossible in the Slow Zone. Again, entry into the Slow Zone has serious implications with respect to being able to re-emerge in less than enormous timescales, especially as the boundaries of the Zones are unknown. A ship straying into the Slow Zone, constrained by relativistic speeds (i.e. speed of light/c) will effectively never be able to return to a universe remotely within its time of entry; nor will A.I. be available.
The next outermost layer is the Beyond, within which artificial intelligence , faster-than-light travel and communication , and antigravity are possible. FTL travel is accomplished by making many small "jumps" across intervening space, and the efficiency of the drive increases the farther a ship travels from the galactic core. The Beyond is not a single zone -- many references are made to, e.g., the 'High Beyond' or the 'Bottom of the Beyond', depending on distance to the galactic core, and unknown boundaries of the Zones, with technologies and machine/organic intelligence capabilities varying accordingly. (In fact, it certainly appears that (a) there are in fact no discrete boundaries, (b) even the rough boundaries are ill-defined, and (c) whatever boundaries there might be are not only not well-known -- they can evidently be changed. (Starships which operate near the Beyond/Slow Zone border often have an auxiliary Bussard ramjet drive, so that, if they accidentally stray into the Slow Zone (thus disabling any FTL drive), they will at least have a backup (sub-light) drive to push them back 'up' to the Beyond. However, it is likely that any such return will still take many subjective lifetimes, for most species.)
The outermost layer, containing the galactic halo, is the Transcend, within which incomprehensible, superintelligent beings dwell.
The Beyond is populated by a very large number of interstellar civilizations which are linked by a faster-than-light communication network, popularly called the "Net of a Million Lies". In the novel, it is depicted as working much like the Usenet network in the early 1990s. A few human civiliziations exist in the Beyond, all descended from a single ethnic Norwegian group which managed to travel to the Beyond and thence spread using FTL travel.
Plot
An expedition from Straumli Realm, an ambitious young human civilization in the Beyond just inside the Transcend border, investigates a five-billion-year-old data archive in the Transcend that offers the possibility of unimaginable riches. The expedition's facility, called High Lab, is gradually compromised by a dormant super-intelligent entity (actually encoded within the archive) later known as the Blight. The Blight rapidly learns how to infiltrate and control the computer systems of High Lab, and even develops the ability to possess and control the living humans. The novel starts with an imaginative description of the evolution of this superintelligence through exponentially accelerating developmental stages, culminating in a transcendent , nigh- omnipotent power that is unfathomable to mere humans. Shortly before its final "flowering", the changes in a single minute of the Blight's life are said to exceed those of 10,000 years of human civilization.
Recognizing the danger of what they have awakened, the researchers at High Lab attempt to flee in two ships. Suspicious, the Blight discovers that one of the ships contains a data storage device in its cargo manifest; assuming it contains information that could harm it, the Blight destroys the ship. The second ship is allowed to escape, unharmed, as the Blight assumes that it is no threat; but later realizes that it actually held a "countermeasure", one of the few things in the universe that the Blight fears.
The ship lands on a distant planet with a medieval -level civilization of dog-like creatures dubbed "Tines", who live in packs as group minds . The ship is revealed to be a sleeper ship , carrying most of High Lab's children in " coldsleep boxes ". The boxes are rapidly failing and the surviving adults begin unloading them, but are killed when one of two rival forces of Tines seize the ship. The faction that initially contacts the humans, led by a Tine known as Steel, kills the adults and destroys many of the coldsleep boxes. They also capture a boy named Jefri Olsndot, whom Steel intended on killing but eventually exploits in order to develop advanced technology (such as cannon and radio communication). Jefri's older sister, Johanna, is rescued by Pilgrim and Scriber, wandering Tines who bring her to the rival faction, led by Woodcarver. She is asked to help develop technology that could gain the upper hand in the impending war.
A distress signal from the sleeper ship eventually reaches "Relay", a major node in the galactic communications network. A benign transcendent entity (known as a "Power") named "Old One" contacts Relay, seeking information about the Blight and the humans who released it. Old One constructs a seemingly human man, Pham Nuwen, to act as its agent. Pham and Ravna Bergsndot – a human employee of Relay's owners, the wealthy Vrinimi Organization – trace the sleeper ship's signal to the Tines world. Vrinimi Org helps modify a vessel, the Out of Band II, to reach the Tines world and to investigate what the ship carried with it from the High Lab.
The Blight attacks Relay and Old One. Old One has given Pham the information necessary to activate the Blight Countermeasure subconsciously, a process known as godshatter (which will result in his death). Pham and Ravna escape Relay's destruction in the Out of Band II. After arriving at the Tines homeworld and allying with Woodcarver to defeat Steel, Pham initiates the Countermeasure, which extends the Slow Zone by thousands of light-years to enclose the Blight. This ends the threat of the Blight at the cost of wrecking thousands of uninvolved civilizations, causing trillions of deaths and potentially the extinction of several galactic races. The process strands the other humans on the Tines world, now in the depths of the "Slow Zone" where rescue by an advanced civilization is impossible.
Just before Pham dies, he realises that although his body is a reconstruction, the memories implanted by Old One are real. Vinge expands on Pham's backstory in A Deepness in the Sky .
Intelligent Species
Aprahanti
A race of humanoids with colorful butterfly-like wings who attempt to use the chaos of the Blight to reestablish their waning hegemony. Despite their attractive, delicate appearance and initial demeanor, the Aprahanti are revealed to be an extremely fearsome and vicious species.
Blight, The (Super-intelligence)
A representative being of a dormant super-intelligent entity group. Such super-intelligences can rapidly infiltrate and control the computer systems of less technologically advanced species, and even develops the ability to possess and control biological beings. Such super-intelligences are effectively immortal, nigh-omnipotent and transcendent.
Dirokimes
Older race of inward dreamers, original inhabitants of Sjandra Kei.
Humans
All humans in the novel (except Pham) are descended from Nyjoran stock. [3] Their ancestors were "Tuvo-Norsk" asteroid miners from Old Earth's solar system, which is noted as being on the other side of the galaxy in the Slow Zone. (Nyjora sounds similar to New Norwegian "New Earth".) One of the major human habitations is Sjandra Kei, three systems [4] comprising roughly 28 billion [5] individuals. Their main language is Samnorsk , the Norwegian term for a hypothetical unification of the Bokmål and Nynorsk forms of the language. (Vinge indicates in the book's dedication that several key ideas in it came to him while at a conference in Tromsø, Norway.)
Skroders / Riders / Skroderiders
A sessile race of trees with fronds that are used for expression. 5 billion years ago, the Blight gave them wheeled mechanical constructs (skrodes) to move and as short-term memory, and the destruction of the Blight survived as their founding myth. The Blight is able to corrupt and operate the Riders via their Skrodes.
Tines
A canid race, each 'person' comprising a group mind of 4-8 individuals, connected by sound-waves. Each 'soul' will last as long as it has members, potentially hundreds of years.
Related works
Vinge first used the concepts of "Zones of Thought" in a 1988 novella, " The Blabber ", which occurs after Fire. Vinge's novel, A Deepness in the Sky (1999), is a prequel to A Fire Upon the Deep set 20,000 years earlier and featuring Pham Nuwen. Vinge's The Children of the Sky , "a near-term sequel to A Fire Upon the Deep", set ten years later, was released in October 2011. [6]
Vinge's former wife, Joan D. Vinge , has also written stories in the Zones of Thought universe, based on his notes. These include "The Outcasts of Heaven Belt", "Legacy", and a planned novel featuring Pham Nuwen. [7]
Awards and nominations
Critical reactions
Jo Walton wrote: "Any one of the ideas in A Fire Upon the Deep would have kept an ordinary writer going for years. For me it’s the book that does everything right, the example of what science fiction does when it works. ... A Fire Upon the Deep remains a favourite and a delight to re-read, absorbing even when I know exactly what’s coming." [9]
