Call It Courage (published as The Boy Who Was Afraid in the United Kingdom) is a book in English written and illustrated by Armstrong Sperry that won the Newbery Medal for excellence in American children's literature in 1941.
Plot summary
A short novel of 116 pages, it is about a boy who tries to overcome his fear of the sea.
Call It Courage is a story set in the Pacific Islands . It chronicles the journey of Mafatu, the son of the chief of Hikueru Island , Tavana Nui. Mafatu is afraid of the sea due to witnessing his mother die as a young child, which makes him a shame to his father, and referred to as a coward among his tribe. One night Mafatu takes a dugout canoe and sets sail into the ocean without knowing where he will end up. He is caught in a storm and the canoe is lost. He lands on a deserted island and learns to hunt and fish for himself, along with his companions Uri, a yellow dog, and Kivi, an albatross.
Soon Mafatu finds a sacrificial altar built by cannibals from a neighboring island. Mafatu realizes his days on the island are numbered and he begins designing his escape by making a canoe. He gathers things he will need to survive a trip across the ocean. He finds a spear point on the terrible altar and uses it to hunt.
After a number of encounters with natural foes, including a shark, a wild boar and an octopus, all of which he successfully kills, he realizes he is gaining courage and learning to deal with the things that have frightened him. The cannibals return and he makes a daring escape from them, returning home at last to his village. He has become transformed by the experience into an imposing figure. His father does not recognize him at first, then proudly accepts him on his return. Mafatu's story is told throughout the ages to the future generations.
Comment from the author
"I had been afraid that perhaps in Call It Courage, the concept of spiritual courage might be too adult for children, but the reception of this book has reaffirmed a belief I have long held: that children have imagination enough to grasp any idea, and respond to it, if it is put to them honestly and without a patronizing pat on the head." [1]
Publications
The book was originally published in 1940 and has had numerous printings since then, and has been translated into many languages, including:
Afrikaans - Die seun wat bang was
Spanish - Estos es coraje
French - Le Garcon qui avait peur
German - Mafatu heißt "Starkes Herz"
Dutch - Mafatu: een jongen die moed had
