The Art of Electronics, by Paul Horowitz and Winfield Hill, is a popular textbook dealing with analog and digital electronics. The first edition was published in 1980,, and the 1989 second edition has been regularly reprinted.
The book covers many areas of electronics design , from basic DC voltage , current , and resistance , to active filters and oscillators , to digital electronics , including microprocessors and digital bus interfacing. It also includes discussions of such often-neglected areas as high-frequency , high-speed design techniques and low- power applications.
The book includes many example circuits. In addition to having examples of good circuits, it also has examples of bad ideas, with discussions of what makes the good designs good and the bad ones bad. It can be described as a cross between a textbook and reference manual, though without the chapter-end questions and exercises which are often found in textbooks.
There is also a complementary text, Student Manual for The Art of Electronics by Thomas C. Hayes and Paul Horowitz . The Student Manual, while referring to the main text extensively, is designed specifically to teach electronics. It contains laboratory exercises and explanatory text supplements aimed at the student. In contrast, The Art of Electronics contains tables , equations , diagrams , and other material practitioners use for reference .
Third edition
The 2nd edition is in some respects out of date, referencing obsolete electrical parts and omitting technologies developed since it was written. Because of this, the third edition is widely anticipated, leading to perennial rumors of its impending release. In 2006 the third edition appeared in some online databases with ISBN 0-521-80926-6 , prompting further speculation. However, Winfield Hill responded with a statement that the book's arrival was still years off. [3] [4]
On Christmas Day 2011 Winfield Hill responded with a statement saying that in January 2012, 15 chapters will have been submitted leaving five chapters. [5] In a subsequent public update in September 2012, Winfield Hill confirmed that the authors were hoping to have the book publicly available "early in 2013", and suggested that as of northern Autumn 2012, the manuscript was still incomplete. [6]
Correspondence with the author has indicated by September 2013 that writing has finished and review and typesetting is next and he expects to finish around mid 2014. [7]
