Al Capone Does My Shirts is a 2004 young adult novel written by Southern California-based author Gennifer Choldenko. The book was named as a Newbery Honor selection and in 2007 it received the California Young Reader Medal.
Al Capone Does My Shirts
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Al Capone Does My Shirts
Author
Followed by
Al Capone Shines My Shoes
Plot summary
Matthew Moose Flanagan and his family have just moved to Alcatraz Island ,off the coast of San Fransisco, and his father has just taken a job as a prison guard and electrician so that his sister Natalie can go to a special school. Moose misses his old baseball team, and he struggles for recognition in his new school. Moose also meets a girl, Piper, who is exceedingly beautiful and seems nice at first but turns out to be quite obnoxious. His sister, Nat, who has a severe case of autism, is rejected from the Esther P. Marinoff School crushing her parents' hopes for Natalie's education. Moose takes care of Natalie after school because his mother, Helen, teaches music lessons, and he must find a way to deal with Natalie's screaming fits and constant needs, including lemon cake and buttons. Complicating Moose's life even more is Piper, the daughter of the prison warden. Piper lures Moose into her scheme to make money by collecting laundry from their classmates with the promise that Al Capone is among the convicts assigned to laundry duty on Alcatraz.
Characters
Mathew "Moose" Flanagan - 12 year old boy who plays baseball and cares for his sister and would do anything to help her into a special school.
Natalie Flanagan - Moose's 16 year old autistic sister; who causes controversy throughout the book.
Piper Williams - 12 year old daughter of the warden, has a collection of prisoner ball,and goes against her fathers rules.
Scout - Moose's best friend and plays baseball with Moose
Cameron "Cam" - Moose's father, works two jobs on Alcatraz (electrician and a guard), looked up to by Moose.
Warden Williams - Father of Piper Williams; is the warden of Alcatraz, very strict about rules
"Onion" - Prisoner #105 of Alcatraz, takes a love interest to Natalie Flanagan.He has that nickname by having very greasy hair.
Annie - only person on the island who can play ball well.
Jimmy - Theresa's older brother
Theresa - A little girl who likes Natalie
Al Capone - Notorious criminal (mob boss and gangster) at Alcatraz, successively accomplishes.
Helen - Moose's mother that does everything she can to get Natalie into a school that can help her be 'normal'.
Mr.Purdy - the headmaster of the boarding school Natalie went to.
