The Antipope is a comic fantasy novel by the British author Robert Rankin. It is Rankin's first novel, and the first book in the Brentford Trilogy (which, as of July 2010, consists of 9 novels). The book was first published in 1981 by Pan Books, and from 1991 by Corgi books, an imprint of Transworld Publishers. Although typically found in the Science Fiction section of bookshops, it is a difficult novel to categorise; Rankin himself wanted to create a new genre of fiction, called "Far Fetched Fiction", so that he would have his own book shelf in Smiths.
Old Pete
Literary significance & criticism
During the 1970s, Rankin wrote a number of short stories. Having been introduced to cultural icon Alan Aldridge , then at Aurelia Entertainment, he submitted some of those stories in the hope of getting a publishing deal. Despite liking the work, Aldridge was of the opinion that the short stories couldn't be published, and asked Rankin to write a novel. Rankin spent the next 6 months merging several of his short stories, resulting in The Antipope, which Aldridge took to Pan Books who bought and subsequently published the novel. [5] [6]
In spite of Aldridge's and Pan's initial enthusiasm, Pan declined to publish any novels beyond the first 3 books of The Brentford Trilogy. Rankin's editor moved to another publisher, and his writing career came to a halt until 1988 when Sphere Books (under the Abacus imprint) reprinted the original trilogy in one volume ( ISBN 978-0-349-10028-9 ). [7]
Despite this inauspicious start, Rankin and The Antipope have since attained something of a cult status, with the following two review extracts printed on the back cover of the Corgi edition:
'Wonderful…A heady mix of Flann O'Brien , Douglas Adams , Tom Sharpe and Ken Campbell , but with an inbuilt irreverence and indelicacy that is unique – and makes it the long-awaited, heavy smoker's answer to The Lord of the Rings' – Time Out [8]
'Wonderfully entertaining…reads like a Flann O'Brien rewrite of Close Encounters' – City Limits [8]
There remain little in the way of "professional" reviews of the novel, however there are many fan's reviews to be found on-line, such as the one at the Sproutlore web site [2] .
Cover art
The original Pan Books release of the novel features a different front cover, shown to the left, by artist Alistair Graham. [9] It depicts five of the main characters of the book, with The Flying Swan in the background and the figure of the resurrected Pope Alexander VI looming ominously over everything.
The stylised drawing of a bull on the more recent Corgi cover represents the red bull of the Borgia coat of arms , [10] with Archroy's five magic beans scattered across it, and was designed by the author for the later edition.
Other media
In addition to the paperback novels, The Antipope has been released as an audio book , first published by Smartpass Ltd in October 1993 ( ISBN 978-1-903362-24-2 ) and narrated by Rankin himself. The audio book stars David Gooderson , Lucy Robinson , and Nick Murchie.
Oneword Radio broadcast the Smartpass production of the novel, read by Robert Rankin, in 21 instalments, during November 2006. [11]
In 2004, the Dreaming Theatre Company produced the first ever stage adaptation of The Antipope; the production toured across the UK playing in venues and festivals. [12] It was adapted by Scott Harrison and Lee Harris, and starred the following cast:
John Omally – Aidan McCarthy
Jim Pooley – Andrew Welch
The Antipope – John Buckeridge
Professor Slocombe – Roger Andrew
Neville, the part-time barman – Scott Harrison
Archroy – Matthew Freeman
Norman Hartnell – Jamie McKeller
It toured as a double bill with Eric , the first ever stage adaptation of this Terry Practchett Discworld novel, also by writers Scott Harrison and Lee Harris. Both plays featured the same actors.
Trivia
Robert Rankin's books feature a recurring set of in jokes , some of which are introduced in this novel:
"The keeping of the now-legendary low profile";
The obviously fictitious biographical details about the author himself are illustrated by the entry in the fly leaf of the Corgi edition:
Magus to the Hermetic Order of the Golden Sprout, 12th Dan Master of Dimac, poet, adventurer, swordsman and concert pianist; big game hunter, Best Dressed Man of 1933; mountaineer, lone yachtsman, Shakespearian actor and topless go-go dancer; Robert Rankin's hobbies include passive smoking , communicating with the dead and lying about his achievements. He lives in Sussex with his wife and family.
