The Great War: American Front is the first alternate history novel in the Great War trilogy by Harry Turtledove. It is part II of Turtledove's Southern Victory Series of novels. It takes the Southern Victory Series from 1914 to 1915.
After a prologue with Robert E. Lee smashing the Army of the Potomac at the Battle of Camp Hill , Pennsylvania , in October 1862, and the subsequent Anglo-French diplomatic recognition of the Confederate States of America , the novel begins on June 28, 1914, the same day Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in Sarajevo .
In the larger Southern Victory Series context, the CSA and the United States of America remained hostile powers toward one another during the decades between 1862 and 1914. A second military defeat of the USA by the CSA in the Second Mexican War (1881-1882) greatly intensified the resentment and hatred of the Confederate States in the USA, where Remembrance Day became a grim official holiday marking the 1882 surrender and keeping alive the dream of revenge for the two humiliations inflicted by the South.
At the eruption of an alternate World War I , the USA and CSA find themselves on opposite sides of the divide between the Central Powers and the Allies , respectively. The fighting in Europe quickly spreads to North America, where the pro-German United States under Theodore Roosevelt declares war on Woodrow Wilson 's CSA, which is allied with Great Britain and France . After initial US invasions of Kentucky , British-controlled Canada , and western Virginia , and CS invasions of Maryland and Pennsylvania , the conflict bogs down into trench warfare . Across the Mississippi River , in the western part of the continent, the conflict is a war of movement.
The novel ends in the autumn of 1915, with the beginning of a Marxist black rebellion against the war-distracted government of the CSA.
Most of the characters in the book are small-time folks being caught up in the bigger world of a global war. One main character in the book whose destiny will be intertwined with that of the twentieth century is an artillery sergeant named Jake Featherston .
