The Great war: Walk in Hell is the second book in the Great War series of alternate history books by Harry Turtledove. It is also part of the Southern Victory Series series (unofficial title). It takes the Southern Victory Series from 1915 to 1916.
The Great War: Breakthroughs
The Great war: Walk in Hell is the second book in the Great War series of alternate history books by Harry Turtledove . It is also part of the Southern Victory Series series (unofficial title). It takes the Southern Victory Series from 1915 to 1916.
Plot summary
The United States and Confederate States are locked in a stalemate (1915-1916), as both of their offensives have stalled; the U.S. in Kentucky pushing south, the C.S.A. in Maryland pushing north. The Confederacy must also deal with their black population rising up in rebellion, and a change in administration.
However, the war begins to turn in the favor of the U.S. as the Kentucky offensive, led by George Armstrong Custer , manages to conquer enough of Kentucky to readmit it to the Union after 54 years as a member of the Confederacy. He uses the new barrels (what we know as tanks) to break through.
The Confederacy, conversely, has begun to lose its gains in southern Pennsylvania , and to be pushed back into Maryland. Washington D.C. , in Confederate hands since 1914, is still in their possession, but as their hold on Maryland weakens, the C.S. is faced with the possibility of losing the old U.S. capital as well.
Meanwhile, Flora Hamburger, a Socialist from New York, gains a nomination from her party, installing her in the House of Representatives .
Faced with a shortage of eligible white men, the Confederacy is forced to consider a bill that would allow blacks to serve in the C.S. Army, even though a number of them had rebelled against the same government that is now offering citizenship to volunteers.
The novel ends as Theodore Roosevelt is re-elected President of the United States and the war is moving more into Confederate territory.
