The True Story of the Three Little Pigs is a children's book by Jon Scieszka and Lane Smith. Released in a number of editions since its first release in 1989, it is a parody of The Three Little Pigs as told by the Big Bad Wolf, known in the book as "A. Wolf," short for "Alexander T. Wolf. " The book was honored by the American Library Association as an ALA Notable Book. Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children. " It was one of the "Top 100 Picture Books" of all time in a 2012 poll by School Library Journal.
43158890
The True Story of the Three Little Pigs is a children's book by Jon Scieszka and Lane Smith . Released in a number of editions since its first release in 1989, it is a parody of The Three Little Pigs as told by the Big Bad Wolf , known in the book as "A. Wolf," short for "Alexander T. Wolf." The book was honored by the American Library Association as an ALA Notable Book . [1] Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children." [2] It was one of the "Top 100 Picture Books" of all time in a 2012 poll by School Library Journal . [3]
Plot
At the beginning of the book Alexander T. Wolf plans a cake for his grandmother's birthday, Although he checks in his cabinet for sugar, but finds nothing, So he decides to go to the pig with the house made of straw, Although the pig won't let him come in Alexander then starts to sneeze (Despite his bad cold of sneezing). Wolf finds the body of the pig and decides to eat him, After eating the first pig, He goes to the pigs house made of straw for sugar, But gives the same word as the first pig, Wolf eventually sneezes again and finds the body of the second pig and devours it, After that Wolf goes to the pigs house made of bricks and asks him for sugar, but gives the same word as the second pig. Wolf sneezes again but doesn't damage the brick house, although Wolf sneezes again and again and starts to get tired, Wolf tries to break the third pigs door, but the police found him trying to break down the pig's door, and news reporters wrote the story, After that Wolf was put in prison for 10 years for eating the two pigs. At the end of the book Wolf asks politely to the police pigs if they have a cup of sugar.
