Faerie Tale is a supernatural thriller, falling within the sub-genre of contemporary fantasy, by Raymond E. Feist, first published in 1988.
Plot Synopsis
From Magill Book Reviews:
"In early summer, the Hastings -- Phil, his wife, teenage daughter, and eight-year-old twin sons -- move into the Old Kessler Place on the edge of a densely wooded parcel known as Erl King Hill. The twins, Sean and Patrick, are the first to feel emanations of evil and danger, even before they hear odd tales of the woods -- missing children, peculiar lights, eerie music. In the following months, disturbing and often terrifying scenes are witnessed and strangely forgotten, desires enflamed, and fear and dread raised as the evil purpose of the Erl King, ruler of the Dark Lands, is carried out. Bitter at the meddling of the Magi, a secret sect of human conjurers whom he credits with the disruption of balance and peace in the spirit world, the Erl King schemes to touch off a war with the humans and eventually reunite the Dark Lands and the Bright Lands, which were rent untold centuries earlier. Acting through the unsavory deeds of his foul pet/servant, the Erl King leads the Hastings to unearth a chest of priceless gold coins, which they are unaware is a good-faith offering by mortals to uphold the truce, or Compact, that has helped to avert war over the centuries.
With the Compact broken by human hands, the Erl King's plan begins to unfold, but his downfall is his desire to add the twins to his warped and perverse entourage. He succeeds in capturing Patrick but underestimates Sean's courage and persistence in a daring rescue. The boys escape by trapping the Erl King in the Hall of Ancient Seasons, from which he is unable to escape in time to journey with the faerie kingdom to their next temporary home. The Compact is restored, the faeries depart, and all the remarkable events disappear from human memory." [2]
About the author
Raymond E. Gonzales III changed his surname after his mother married Felix E. Feist. He graduated with honors in Communication Arts 1977 University of California . His first novel was written two years later (1982) and published by Doubleday
A New York Times, and Times of London Best-seller, he is the author of Magician , Silverthorn , and A Darkness at Sethanon , the three novels comprising The Riftwar Saga , the first series in the Arc that has become known as the Riftwar Cycle . Other works include the Empire Trilogy (co-authored with Janny Wurts ), Krondor's Sons, comprising Prince of the Blood and The Kings Buccaneer. Subsequently he wrote the Serpentwar Saga , and The Riftwar Legacy series which is based in part on the hugely successful computer games set in his universe, Betrayal at Krondor and Return to Krondor . [3]
