West of Eden is a 1984 science fiction novel by American writer Harry Harrison.
Overview
In the parallel universe of this novel, Earth was not struck by an asteroid 65 million years before the present. Consequently, the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event which wiped out the dinosaurs and other reptiles never happened, leaving the way clear for an intelligent species to eventually evolve from the mosasaur , a species of reptile related to the modern monitor lizards . This relationship would mean that the intelligent species are not dinosaurs but lizard-people.
The lizard-people are known as the Yilané, and are the dominant life form on most of the planet. However, during the evolutionary process, the species became non-viable on the two American continents, leaving them free of Yilané for millions of years and opening an ecological niche for a top predator. A human-like species, the Tanu, evolved to fill the niche in North America, but are only found on that continent. By the time the novel begins, the humanoids have reached a late stone age level of technology and culture, with a number of societies having developed farming skills.
The Yilané, having had millions of years of civilization, have a very advanced society primarily based on a mastery of the biological sciences, especially genetic engineering , so much so that almost every tool and artifact they use is a modified lifeform. Their boats were originally squids , their submarines are enhanced ichthyosaurs (here called uruketos), and their guns are evolved monitor lizards which eject projectiles using pressurised gas.
The Yilané are a matriarchal society . The females control all political, military, and scientific aspects of the culture and keep the males segregated. Males are primarily poets and artisans, and enjoy dull, pampered lifestyles. Repeated matings will kill males, so they are generally very wary of the females. The Yilané language is incredibly complex, based on sounds, colour (The Yilané are able to alter the skin colour on parts of their body, notably the hands, akin to Chameleons) and body movements, and a key factor in social status among females is how well the language is mastered. As their emotions are directly and immediately translated into the movement of their bodies, Yilané cannot lie. In order to deceive others they may only restrict their movements or go into a state of immobility until the emotion or thought has passed.
Plot
The story revolves around the eventual discovery of the American continents by the Yilané, who are searching for new resources and territories for colonization. Being reptiloid and cold-blooded, they target tropical and sub-tropical zones.
Eventually, of course, they encounter the humanoids, whom they regard as barely sentient animals. Humans, in their turn, are xenophobically terrified of the Yilané. As the winters become colder the Tanu are forced to travel south into warmer climates to hunt, onto Yilané territory. It is not long before a state of conflict exists between the two species.
The central characters are Vaintè, an ambitious Yilané; Stallan, her vicious and obedient adjutant; and Kerrick , a "ustouzou" (the Yilané word for mammal) who is captured by the reptiloids as a boy, and raised as a Yilané. Kerrick eventually escapes to rejoin his own people, ultimately becoming a leader. Another notable Yilanè character is Enge, the leader of a faction of pacifist Yilané who reject the militaristic and violent attitudes of their culture. This group is violently opposed by most other Yilané, especially Vaintè. Enge befriends Kerrick, and acts as his teacher, while he lives with the Yilané.
After Kerrick escapes he joins other human tribes and after a journey over the mountains, being pursued all the while by Vaintè, who wants nothing more than the absolute destruction of the ustouzou. After a number of victories, Kerrick realises that despite the losses inflicted upon the Yilané, the Yilané will never stop pursuing them. Kerrick organises an expedition back to the Yilané city of Alpèasak where he was held as a boy, and burns it down. The American continent is freed of the Yilané.
The story continues in two sequels, Winter in Eden and Return to Eden .
The title is a play on East of Eden [ citation needed ], the John Steinbeck novel about social injustice, whose title is itself a play on the concept of the Cain 's flight East of Eden after murdering his brother Abel . He departs to the Land of Nod .
The title can also be seen as a reference to the Book of Genesis . Adam and Eve are driven east out of the Garden of Eden . Being "west of eden" then, is a reference to the counterhistorical premise of the novel.[ citation needed ]
