The Angel's Command is a novel by Brian Jacques, author of the popular children's series Redwall, and the sequel to Castaways of the Flying Dutchman. It follows the adventures of an immortal boy and his dog as they face pirates and other dangers from the high seas to the mountains. The Angel’s Command http://www. fantasticfiction. co. uk/images/n9/n45387. jpg is based on the legend of the Flying Dutchman. It tells of how a young boy and his dog managed to escape the fate that befell the Flying Dutchman. Instead, they were granted the ability to speak in any tongue, talk to each other, and eternal life. Ben, the boy, and Ned, the dog, are sent on a mission to help those in need. First, they meet up with a buccaneer and try to help him fulfill his dream of returning home. Ben and Ned are beset by challenges, and the last one causes the death of their dear friend. Afterwards, they meet up with two other young people, Dominic and Karayna. They help an old count find his lost nephew, Adamo, who is cursed by the Razan leader to be trapped in a bear hide. Ned, Ben, Karayna, and Dominic try to break the spell and restore peace and happiness to the town. Nevertheless, the boy and his dog must move on, and their story continues. The novel was followed by a sequel in 2006 titled Voyage of Slaves.
Voyage of Slaves
The Angel's Command is a novel by Brian Jacques , author of the popular children's series Redwall , and the sequel to Castaways of the Flying Dutchman . It follows the adventures of an immortal boy and his dog as they face pirates and other dangers from the high seas to the mountains.
The Castaways of the Flying Dutchman trilogy is based on the legend of the Flying Dutchman . It tells of how a young boy and his dog managed to escape the fate that befell the Flying Dutchman. Instead, they were given eternal life, the ability to speak in any tongue, and the ability to talk to each other with their thoughts. Ben, the boy, and Ned, the dog, are sent on a mission to help those in need.
In The Angel's Command, they meet up with a French buccaneer and try to help him fulfill his dream of returning home. Ben and Ned are beset by challenges, and the last one causes the death of their dear friend. Afterwards, they meet up with two other young people, Dominic and Karay. They help an old count find his lost nephew, Adamo, who is captive to the Razan, a clan of robbers living in the Pyrenees , led by an old witch. Ned, Ben, Karay, and Dominic manage to rescue Adamo. Nevertheless, the boy and his dog must move on, and their story continues. The novel was followed by a sequel in 2006 titled Voyage of Slaves .
