The Pyrates is a comedic novel by George MacDonald Fraser, published in 1983. Fraser called it "a burlesque fantasy on every swashbuckler I ever read or saw. " Written in arch, ironic style and containing a great deal of deliberate anachronism, it traces the adventures of a classic hero (Captain Benjamin Avery, RN, very loosely based on Henry Avery), multiple damsels in distress, and the six captains who lead the infamous Coast Brotherhood (Calico Jack Rackham, Black Bilbo, Firebeard, Happy Dan Pew, Akbar the Terrible and Sheba the She-Wolf). It also concerns the charismatic anti-hero, Colonel Thomas Blood (cashiered), a rakish dastard who is loosely modeled on the historical figure, Thomas Blood. All of the above face off against the malevolently hilarious Spanish viceroy of Cartagena, Don Lardo. The book's 400 pages of continuous action travel from England to Madagascar to various Caribbean ports of call along the Spanish Main.
Publication date
1983
The Pyrates is a comedic novel by George MacDonald Fraser , published in 1983. Fraser called it "a burlesque fantasy on every swashbuckler I ever read or saw." [1]
Written in arch, ironic style and containing a great deal of deliberate anachronism, it traces the adventures of a classic hero (Captain Benjamin Avery, RN, very loosely based on Henry Avery ), multiple damsels in distress, and the six captains who lead the infamous Coast Brotherhood ( Calico Jack Rackham , Black Bilbo, Firebeard, Happy Dan Pew, Akbar the Terrible and Sheba the She-Wolf). It also concerns the charismatic anti-hero, Colonel Thomas Blood (cashiered), a rakish dastard who is loosely modeled on the historical figure, Thomas Blood . All of the above face off against the malevolently hilarious Spanish viceroy of Cartagena, Don Lardo. The book's 400 pages of continuous action travel from England to Madagascar to various Caribbean ports of call along the Spanish Main .
Adaptations
A world premiere stage adaptation was written and produced by members of Chicago's Defiant Theatre in 2004.
The book is completely unrelated to the 1991 movie Pyrates starring Kevin Bacon ; however, a television adaptation starring Marcus Gilbert and Jane Snowden was shown on BBC2 on 28 December 1986. [2]
References
^ George MacDonald Fraser, The Light's On at Signpost, HarperCollins 2002 p311
^ "Bbc 1." Times [London, England] 27 Dec. 1986: 41. The Times Digital Archive. Web. 16 Sept. 2013.
