Iggie's House is a 1970 young adult novel by Judy Blume. The story concerns Winnie, whose best friend Iggie has moved away. The new family moving into Iggie's house are the first African Americans in the neighborhood. While Winnie is quick to make friends with the new kids, she realizes that some people, possibly including her own parents, have trouble seeing past a person's color.
Plot summary
Tomboyish Winnie Barringer is crestfallen over her close friend Iggie's move; however, she immediately takes an interest in the African-American family that has relocated in Iggie's old house, the Garbers, and prioritizes befriending the family's children over all else. However, her chances of befriending them are damaged after she brings up racist subjects inadvertently, and she is infuriated over her snobby, prejudiced neighbor Mrs. Landon's attempts at running the Garbers out of town because of their race. Fortunately, despite Winnie's unintentional racism in their first conversation, she reconciles with the Garber children and continues to bond with them, despite several major bumps in the road along the way (including Mrs. Landon's horrendous treatment of the family), and she fears that these disadvantages may prod the Garbers into relocating once again. As the story draws to a close, Winnie aborts her original intentions to stow away aboard a ship to Japan (where Iggie's new home is located) and successfully becomes acquainted with the Garbers, and is uplifted to learn of prissy Mrs. Landon's choice to move away for no reason other than her prejudice.
Winifred "Winnie" Bates Barringer - a tomboy about to start sixth grade, protagonist
Paul and Helen Barringer - Winnie's parents
The Garbers - The African-American family who move into Iggie's old house:
Glenn - The oldest boy, Winnie's age (sixth grade), who is mild-mannered and level-headed.
Herbie - Younger boy, starting fifth grade, who is more dramatic, angry, and sarcastic.
Tina - Youngest, eight years old, who is just a typical girl.
Dorothy Landon - The snooty and bigoted neighbor who is most adamant about getting the Garbers out of the neighborhood.
Clarice Landon - Mrs. Landon's prissy daughter, whom Winnie despises but eventually feels sorry for due to her mother.
