Gone-Away Lake is a 1958 Newbery Honor winning children's book by Elizabeth Enright. It received the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1970. Gone-Away Lake tells the story of cousins who spend a summer exploring and discover a lost lake and the two people who still live there.
Plot
Gone-Away Lake opens on a train traveling through the countryside of western New York state. Ten-year-old Portia Blake and her six-year-old brother Foster are going to see their favorite cousin, enthusiastic amateur naturalist Julian Jarman. The Jarmans have recently purchased a house in the country. Once there, Portia and Julian spend their days exploring, and one day they discover an abandoned Victorian resort community next to a bog. Elderly siblings Mr. Payton and Mrs. Cheever, the town's only remaining inhabitants, soon become friends with the children, who set up a club in one of the empty houses.
Stories of the days when the bog was a lake called Tarrigo are interspersed with the modern-day adventures of Portia and Julian, who at first keep the lake and their new friends a secret. Foster soon discovers the secret and eventually the rest of the Jarman and Blake families also become acquainted with the charms of Gone-Away and its inhabitants. In Return to Gone-Away , a sequel published in 1961, the Blake family buys and restores a house at Gone-Away.
Awards, reception
Gone-Away Lake was a Newbery Honor book in 1958. [1] It received the New York Herald Tribune 's Children's Spring Book Festival Award in 1957. [2] In 1963 the American Library Association named Gone-Away Lake as the U.S. nominee for the international Hans Christian Andersen Award , and in 1970 it received the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award . [3]
Reviewers then and now praise Enright's excellent characterization, her use of description, and strong presentation of setting and nature in Gone-Away Lake. Irene Haas' review mentioned that "Animals abound, and secrets and clubs, danger and daring…" [4] According to Saturday Review, Enright "knows how to create real children". [2] Writer and reviewer Anita Silvey calls Gone-Away Lake "Enright's finest achievement." Silvey goes on to praise "Her descriptive powers and unique ability to observe the world through the eyes of a child..." [5] Children's book expert May Hill Arbuthnot also praised Enright's fine use of description, reminding the reader that "Good prose style for any age level surprises and delights." [6]
