13 Little Blue Envelopes is a 2005 novel by Maureen Johnson. A young woman embarks on a journey throughout Europe by following instructions left to her in letters from her aunt (who died unexpectedly after preparing the letters).
Plot summary
Virginia "Ginny" Blackstone, a seventeen-year-old girl who is on summer break before her final year of high school, has received 13 blue envelopes from her self-proclaimed "Runaway Aunt" Peg, who is now dead. Ginny is told that she is about to leave for several weeks and will travel to foreign lands. Her aunt leaves her four rules to follow: she can only bring what fits into a backpack, she cannot bring any kind of journal or foreign language aid, she cannot bring extra money of any kind, and she cannot use or bring anything electronic with her. Ginny is only allowed to open the next envelope once she has reached the destination or has completed the task set in the previous letter.
The envelopes lead her to London , where she meets a "starving" artist named Keith, and Aunt Peg's best friend and roommate, Richard. She realizes she has a crush on Keith, and they go to Scotland to meet her aunt's guru , artist Mari Adams. After she has an argument with Keith, they part ways, though they meet again briefly in Paris . Later, she encounters a horrible hotel in Amsterdam , along with a very hyperactive family. Following the letters, she goes to Denmark and meets four Australian students, Emmett, Bennett, Nigel, and Carrie. Together they form the "Blue Envelope Gang" and follow the second-to-last envelope to Greece . On the way, the 12th envelope tells her she can open the last one whenever she feels ready.
While in Greece, her backpack is stolen, along with the 13th envelope. She enlists Richard's help to return to England; upon arriving there Richard tells her that he and Peg were married during her final days with her fatal illness, which makes Richard Ginny's uncle. This last bit of information completely unsettles the already-distressed girl, who runs to Keith's house for the night. Returning to Richard's apartment the next day, she manages to discover a trove of her aunt's final paintings in the attic of Harrods , a large department store in London, which her aunt used as a private art studio. The painting collection is sold at auction, and the proceeds become her inheritance. She writes a letter to her aunt, letting her know that even though she never read the 13th envelope, she knows what it said. Ginny finally makes her way back home to New Jersey, after leaving half the inheritance to Richard.
Reception
Critical reviews for 13 Little Blue Envelopes has been mostly positive. The School Library Journal positively reviewed 13 Little Blue Envelopes, calling it a "quick read" and "the novel drives home the importance of family, love, and the value of connections that you make with people". [1] RT Book Reviews praised Johnson's originality, saying that she "puts an original twist on the genre and leaves some wonderful surprises for the end as well". [2] Booklist wrote that the idea of a young girl traveling alone on an undefined journey "stretches plausibility", but that the book also had "sensitive, authentically portrayed experiences". [3] Publishers Weekly and Kirkus Reviews both positively reviewed the book, with Kirkus calling Johnson's writing "sophisticated and humorous". [4] [5]
Sequel
The Last Little Envelope is the sequel to 13 Little Blue Envelopes published in 2011, which involves Ginny's stolen envelope from her aunt that she was never able to read. To her surprise, she receives an email from an uptight young man named Oliver, who unwittingly bought Ginny's stolen backpack in Greece and offers to meet her in London, where he lives. While she is hesitant, Ginny also takes the trip as an opportunity to reunite with Keith, her old flame from the first novel. She is devastated to learn that Keith has a new girlfriend and she tries to distract herself by focusing on meeting Oliver in order to obtain the last envelope. Oliver returns most of the things from her bag, however, he won't relinquish the last envelope, which includes a scavenger hunt challenge to find three parts of her aunt's last artistic masterpiece and assemble it. Ginny is shocked and angry to learn that Oliver will only give her the last letter if he gets half the profit from selling the new masterpiece. As Ginny continues to travel across Europe with Oliver, her ex-boyfriend, his new girlfriend, she begins to learn more about her aunt, herself, and the people around her.
