On Heaven and Earth (Spanish: Sobre el cielo y la tierra) is a 2010 book of conversations between the Argentine cardinal Jorge Bergoglio, who later became Pope Francis, and the Argentine rabbi Abraham Skorka. The book is about faith, family and the Catholic Church in the 21st century. It was first published in Spanish 2010. Plans have been announced for the publication of an English translation on 7 May 2013, under the title On Heaven and Earth: Pope Francis on Faith, Family and the Church in the 21st Century. Among the comments that attracted particular attention following Bergolio's election to the papacy were these: For now the discipline of celibacy remains firm. Some say, with a certain pragmatism, we're losing manpower. If, hypothetically, Western Catholicism revises the issue of celibacy, I think it would be for cultural reasons (as in the East), not as a universal option. For the moment, I am in favor of maintaining celibacy, with the pros and cons it has, because there are 10 centuries of good experiences rather than failures.... It is a matter of discipline, not of faith. It can change.
Published in English
7 May 2013
On Heaven and Earth ( Spanish : Sobre el cielo y la tierra) is a book that presents conversations between Argentine Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio, who later became Pope Francis , and Argentine rabbi Abraham Skorka . The book is about faith, family and the Catholic Church in the 21st century. It was first published in Spanish in 2010 and appeared in an English translation in 2013. [1]
Among the comments that attracted particular attention following Bergolio's election to the papacy were these: [2]
For now the discipline of celibacy remains firm. Some say, with a certain pragmatism, we're losing manpower. If, hypothetically, Western Catholicism revises the issue of celibacy, I think it would be for cultural reasons (as in the East), not as a universal option. For the moment, I am in favor of maintaining celibacy, with the pros and cons it has, because there are 10 centuries of good experiences rather than failures.... It is a matter of discipline, not of faith. It can change.
References
^ On Heaven and Earth: Pope Francis on Faith, Family, and the Church in the Twenty-first Century. translated by Alejandro Bermudez and Howard Goodman. New York: Image Books. 2013. ISBN   9780770435066 . 
^ Manseau, Peter (21 March 2013). "In Praise of Priestly Marriage" . New York Times. Retrieved 21 March 2013. 
