Pretty Little Liars is the first book in the Pretty Little Liars series by Sara Shepard. It tells the story of four girls - Hanna, Aria, Emily and Spencer - after the disappearance of their clique leader, Alison. The book was written for the book packaging company Alloy Entertainment, the idea originally developed as a TV series.
Flawless
Pretty Little Liars is the first book in the Pretty Little Liars series by Sara Shepard . It tells the story of four girls - Hanna, Aria, Emily and Spencer - after the disappearance of their clique leader, Alison. The book was written for the book packaging company Alloy Entertainment , the idea originally developed as a TV series.
Plot
The story introduces an exclusive group of friends: Alison DiLaurentis , the perfect yet manipulative queen bee, Aria Montgomery , an independent girl who is considered to be the weirdo in Rosewood, Emily Fields , a swimmer who holds secret feelings for Alison, Hanna Marin , the overweight girl who strives to be thin and popular like Alison, and Spencer Hastings , an ambitious girl who is brave enough to stand up against Alison's manipulative ways. Alison mysteriously disappears during a sleepover with the girls at the end of their seventh grade school year.
The story then jumps to 1 year after, where the girls are now separated. Aria returns to Rosewood from a 1 year trip to Iceland with her family and comes back much more sophisticated than before she left. She meets and sleeps with a guy in a local bar who is revealed to be her English teacher, Ezra Fitz . Emily befriends the new girl in town, Maya St. Germain ,and soon develops romantic feelings for her. Hanna lost the weight and is the new popular girl in town alongside the former nerd, Mona Vanderwaal . However, she and Mona will sometimes shoplift. Hanna battles urges to turn back to bulimia, and struggles to manage the stress of keeping her Queen Bee status. Spencer continues to struggle against the rivalry with her and Melissa Hastings , her perfect older sister. Problems occur when she extremely starts to feel attracted to Melissa's new boyfriend, Wren Kim , when he is introduced to the family.
Template:All Pretty Little Liars Books This book series is popular on abc family. Sara Shepard is also the author of "The Lying game"
