The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig is a children's picture book written by Eugene Trivizas (Evgenios Trivizas), illustrated by Helen Oxenbury, and first published 1993 in the U.K. The story is a comically inverted version of the classic Three Little Pigs, a fable published in the 19th century and probably traditional. Oxenbury was highly commended runner up for the annual Kate Greenaway Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book illustration by a British subject. The "Highly Commended" distinction was used 31 times in 29 years to 2002, including Oxenbury alone for 1993. In the U.S. , where it was also published in 1993, The Three Little Wolves reached number two on the New York Times Best Seller list for picture books. It was named an "ALA Notable Book" and a "School Library Journal Best Book" and it won the "Parents Choice Amazing Accomplishment Award". WorldCat participating libraries report holding editions in 15 languages of translation. Publishers Weekly concluded its review, "Trivizas laces the text with funny, clever touches, from an ensemble of animals who obligingly donate whatever building materials the wolves require, to the wolves' penultimate, armor-plated residence replete with a "video entrance phone" over which the pig can relay his formulaic threats. Oxenbury's watercolors capture the story's broad humor and add a wealth of supplementary details, with exquisite renderings of the wolves' comic temerity and the pig's bellicose stances. Among the wittiest fractured fairytales around."
LCC PZ8.1.T7384 [1]
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig is a children's picture book written by Eugene Trivizas (Evgenios Trivizas), illustrated by Helen Oxenbury , and first published by Heinemann in 1993. The story is a comically inverted version of the classic Three Little Pigs , a fable published in the 19th century and probably traditional.
Oxenbury was highly commended runner-up for the annual Kate Greenaway Medal from the Library Association , recognising the year's best children's book illustration by a British subject . The "Highly Commended" distinction was used 31 times in 29 years to 2002, including Oxenbury alone for 1993. [2]
In the U.S., where it was also published in 1993, The Three Little Wolves reached number two on the New York Times Best Seller list for picture books . It was named an " ALA Notable Book " and a " School Library Journal Best Book" and it won the "Parents Choice Amazing Accomplishment Award".[ clarification needed ]
WorldCat participating libraries report holding editions in 15 languages of translation.[ citation needed ]
Publishers Weekly concluded its review, "Trivizas laces the text with funny, clever touches, from an ensemble of animals who obligingly donate whatever building materials the wolves require, to the wolves' penultimate, armor-plated residence replete with a "video entrance phone" over which the pig can relay his formulaic threats. Oxenbury's watercolors capture the story's broad humor and add a wealth of supplementary details, with exquisite renderings of the wolves' comic temerity and the pig's bellicose stances. Among the wittiest fractured fairytales around." [3]
ISBN (hardcover, publ. Heinemann Young Books)
ISBN 0-689-50569-8 (hardcover, publ. Margaret K. McElderry, first U.S. edition, 1993) [1]
