The Great War and Modern Memory is a book of literary criticism written by Paul Fussell and published in 1975 by Oxford University Press. It describes the literary responses by English participants in World War I to their experiences of combat, particularly in trench warfare. The perceived futility and insanity of this conduct became, for many gifted Englishmen of their generation, a metaphor for life. Fussell describes how the collective experience of the "Great War" was correlated with, and to some extent underlain by, an enduring shift in the aesthetic perceptions of individuals, from the tropes of Romanticism that had guided young adults before the war, to the harsher themes that came to be dominant during the war and after.
Criticism
Various historians have critiqued The Great War and Modern Memory for its flawed methodology, overstated assertions and outright errors. For instance Professor Jay Winter notes that the effort to make sense of the war, and particularly the loss of life, evoked many conventional and traditional motifs.
‘This vigour mining of eighteenth and nineteenth century images and metaphors to accommodate expressions of mourning is one reason why it is unacceptable to see the Great War as the moment when ‘modern memory’ replaced something else, something timeworn and discredited’. [5]
Dr Dan Todman, among others, notes that Fussell selected a narrow range of sources, ignoring those which do not complement his thesis, and assuming that the poets and novelists he selects can be treated as spokesmen for the ranks.
‘In terms of cultural history, Fussell came to his subject with a strict theoretical framework and then selected texts which supported his case. He therefore blinded himself to the variety of different literary reactions to the war, which included not only a striving for new modes of expression but also a falling back onto reassuring traditions … The Great War and Modern Memory is, in other words, a work of polemic rather than analysis and has to be treated as such.’ [6]
Dr Robin Prior and Professor Trevor Wilson outline the major flaws in Fussell’s understanding of the military history of the war. [7]
