Pearl in the Mist is the second book in the Landry Family series by author V. C. Andrews. It is told from the point of view of Ruby Landry.
Life
Andrews was born in Portsmouth, Virginia , the youngest child and only daughter of the Andrews family. As a teenager, Andrews suffered a fall from a school stairwell, resulting in severe back injuries. The subsequent surgery to correct these injuries resulted in Andrews’s suffering from crippling arthritis that required her to use crutches and a wheelchair for much of her life. However, Andrews, who had always shown promise as an artist, was able to complete a four-year correspondence course from her home and soon became a successful commercial artist , illustrator, and portrait painter.
Later in life, Andrews turned to writing. Her first novel, titled Gods of Green Mountain, was a science fiction effort that remained unpublished during her lifetime but was released as an e-book in 2004. In 1975, Andrews completed a manuscript for a novel she called The Obsessed. The novel was returned with the suggestion that she "spice up" and expand the story. In later interviews, Andrews claims to have made the necessary revisions in a single night, re-submitting the changes as Flowers in the Attic . The novel, published in 1979, was an instant popular success, reaching the top of the bestseller lists in only two weeks. Every year thereafter until her death, Andrews published a new novel, each publication earning Andrews larger advances and a growing popular readership.
"I think I tell a whopping good story. And I don't drift away from it a great deal into descriptive material", she stated in Faces of Fear in 1985. "When I read, if a book doesn't hold my interest about what's going to happen next, I put it down and don't finish it. So I'm not going to let anybody put one of my books down and not finish it. My stuff is a very fast read."
Andrews died of breast cancer on December 19, 1986, in Virginia Beach, Virginia . [2] After her death, her family hired a ghost writer , Andrew Neiderman , to finish the manuscripts she had started. He would complete the next two novels, Garden of Shadows and Fallen Hearts, and they were published soon after. These two novels are considered the last to bear the "V.C. Andrews" name and to be almost completely written by Andrews herself.
Structure
Andrews's works are grouped into series of five books. The first 5 series share several elements: The first few books are about the main character (always female); the fourth is about that character's child or another family member; and the last is a prequel about the main character's grandmother, explaining how the events of the first book arose.
After the Logan series ended, Neiderman decided to follow publishers' wishes and try something different with the Orphans miniseries; since then, only the Hudson and DeBeers series have followed the original formula.
The formula for the Orphans, Wildflowers, Shooting Stars, and Broken Wings series all follow the same structure. The first few books are each told from the main character's point of view. The fifth book is then told from the point of view of the character from the book before, the exception being the Orphans series. The Broken Wings series was only two books, although the first book contained four stories.
Bibliography
The Dollanganger series
Andrews's first series of novels concentrates on the lives of the Dollanganger family and was published between 1979 and 1986.
The first two novels, Flowers in the Attic and Petals on the Wind, focus on the Dollanganger children: Chris, Cathy, Cory, and Carrie. The Dollangangers are initially imprisoned in an attic by their mother and horrible grandmother, and Flowers in the Attic tells of their incarceration and subsequent escape. Petals on the Wind picks up the story directly after their escape from the attic without one of their siblings. If There Be Thorns and Seeds of Yesterday continue to tell their story, but the focus shifts to Cathy's children Jory and Bart after a mysterious woman and her butler move in next door and start inviting Bart over, turning him into a monster. Garden of Shadows is a prequel that tells the story of the grandparents, Olivia and Malcolm Foxworth.
