The Batman Adventures: Mad Love is a one-shot comic book written by Paul Dini and Bruce Timm . Set in the continuity of The Batman Animated Series, it won an Eisner Award for "Best Single Story" in 1994. It was later adapted (with minor alterations for pacing) as an episode of the animated series The New Batman Adventures.
Plot summary
The story revolves around the Joker 's sidekick Harley Quinn , who was once psychiatrist Dr. Harleen Quinzel. She falls in love with the Joker after treating him inside Arkham Asylum , where he tells her that he was abused as a child by his alcoholic father. She develops an obsession with him, and turns to crime just to win his love.
Years later, the Joker still remains fixated on killing Batman in spectacular fashion, rebuffing Quinn's advances and kicking her out of their hideout. Quinn decides that the only way to make the Joker love her is to kill Batman, which she attempts to do by feeding him to a school of piranhas . She nearly succeeds, but Batman distracts her by telling her that the Joker has been using her from the start, and that the Joker's stories of an unhappy childhood were lies. When she tearfully insists that the Joker really loves her, Batman convinces her to call the Joker so that he will know she accomplished her goal (as otherwise, the piranhas would leave no evidence).
When the Joker arrives, however, he is infuriated that Harley would try to kill Batman herself; Harley explains her plan to him, but the Joker only gets angrier, roaring, "If you have to explain a joke, there is no joke!" He then strikes Quinn with a plastic swordfish , knocking her out a window; Renee Montoya saves her life. The Joker decides nonetheless to use the opportunity to finally kill Batman, apparently taking Harley's earlier idea of "just shooting him" instead of a complicated plan. This escalates into a wild chase ending atop a moving subway train, where Batman confronts his nemesis, taunting him, "I have to admit she came a lot closer to killing me than you ever did... Puddin'!" Enraged, the Joker attacks him, but Batman sends him lunging into a burning smokestack.
Back in Arkham, a severely injured Quinn renounces the Joker forever, wanting nothing more than to heal and leave Arkham for good. Joan Leland, the head therapist at Arkham shows up to mock Harley for having trusted the Joker. A moment later, however, Harley finds flowers sent by her clownish beau with a "get well soon" card and falls in love with him again.
Reprints
Mad Love was reprinted as a graphic novella in 1998 ( ISBN 1563892448 ), and in 2009 the story was collected – alongside a number of others by Bruce Timm and Paul Dini – in a hardcover collection titled Batman: Mad Love and Other Stories ( ISBN 9781401222451 ). [2]
Critical reaction
IGN Comics said that "Mad Love is everything a comic book should be" and called it "one Batman book everyone should read". [3] The website ranked Mad Love #12 on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels. [4]
