The First Part Last is a young adult novel by Angela Johnson that deals with the subject of teen pregnancy. Johnson writes the story in first person narration from the perspective of Bobby, the 16-year-old father, setting it apart from most books on the subject. The book is divided into four parts and its chapters alternate between "then" and "now. " Bobby and Nia, the child's mother, are urban upper-middle-class African-American teenagers in New York. Although the parents initially intended to give their daughter Feather up for adoption, Bobby raises the little girl on his own and realizes how hard it truly is to be a parent. Bobby becomes tired all the time, and can't always get to school on time. Bobby's mother won't do any of the work, because she feels that doing so will only make Bobby more dependent upon them. Nia, while giving birth to Feather, gets eclampsia, a life threatening complication, which leaves her in a permanent coma. In the end, Bobby moves to Heaven, Ohio.
LC Class
PZ7.J629 Fi 2003
The First Part Last is a young adult novel by Angela Johnson that deals with the subject of teen pregnancy . Johnson writes the story in first person narration from the perspective of Bobby, the 16-year-old father, setting it apart from most books on the subject. The book is divided into four parts and its chapters alternate between "then" and "now."
Bobby and Nia, the child's mother, are urban upper-middle-class African-American teenagers in New York . Although the parents initially intended to give their daughter Feather up for adoption, Bobby raises the little girl on his own and realizes how hard it truly is to be a parent. Bobby becomes tired all the time, and can't always get to school on time. Bobby's mother won't do any of the work, because she feels that doing so will only make Bobby more dependent upon them. Nia, while giving birth to Feather, gets eclampsia , a life threatening complication, which leaves her in a permanent coma. In the end, Bobby moves to Heaven, Ohio.
Contents
