To Reign In Hell: The Exile of Khan Noonien Singh, is the final book in a trilogy of novels written by Greg Cox chronicling the life of the fictional Star Trek character Khan Noonien Singh. This final book deals with the life of Khan after he was marooned on Ceti Alpha V by Captain James T. Kirk. The book takes place between the original series episode "Space Seed" and the motion picture Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, and contains numerous retcon references that seek to resolve discrepancies between the episode and the film.
The Eugenics Wars: The Rise and Fall of Khan Noonien Singh
To Reign In Hell: The Exile of Khan Noonien Singh, is the final book in a trilogy of novels written by Greg Cox chronicling the life of the fictional Star Trek character Khan Noonien Singh . This final book deals with the life of Khan after he was marooned on Ceti Alpha V by Captain James T. Kirk .
Plot summary
The book begins with Khan, Lt. Marla McGivers, and most of the other supermen and women that had been with him on the SS Botany Bay arriving on the planet Ceti Alpha V. Khan is given supplies and a phaser and begins to build a colony on the planet. Khan is challenged several times by his fellow supermen, but remains in control for the most part.
Six months after the supermen arrive, the next planet in the Ceti Alpha system, Ceti Alpha VI, explodes and disrupts the orbit of Ceti Alpha V. This causes major climate changes and loss of plant and animal life. Khan and the supermen take refuge underground and Khan waits for Kirk to arrive and rescue him and his followers from the hell that the planet has become.
After more time passes, several supermen do not wish to follow Khan any longer and try to assassinate Khan by placing a Ceti Eel in Marla McGivers' ear. This bizarre creature causes her to do whatever is commanded of her, and the men order her to kill Khan. Marla's love for Khan allows her to resist enough to instead kill herself. The eel emerges from her ear after her death and Khan sees the reason why she died.
After the failed assassination, the rebels leave the underground and form a new faction on the planet, taking control of the vital hot springs that provide the only water on the planet. Khan then battles them, losing many men and women, but winning in the end.
At the end of the novel a few years later, Khan sees two men in space suits materialize on the planet's surface.
Throughout the novel, Khan blames his hardships on James Kirk for stranding him on the planet and never checking on him again.
Secondary plot
The book also has a secondary plot with James T. Kirk, Sulu , Spock , and Leonard McCoy going to Ceti Alpha V after the events of the second, third , and fourth Star Trek movies had already taken place. Kirk is filled with guilt and wishes to find out more about Khan's life on the planet. He goes to the bunker that is shown in the second movie and finds Khan's diary. This is when the book moves into Khan's story.
At certain points along the way and after Khan's story is complete, the book continues with Kirk's story. He and the rest of the party go into the underground tunnels that are beneath the bunker to learn even more about Khan's life but are captured by the children of the second faction on the planet who have taken over the bunker in Khan's absence. Kirk, "the Abandoner," is going to be killed because of what he did, but instead Kirk offers to take all of the supermen and women to Sycorax, a planet populated by genetically altered humans that is mentioned in the sidestory of the first two novels in this series. The supermen agree to go with Kirk and say that Kirk may not be "the Abandoner" after all. After Khan's death, Captain Kirk, Captain Spock, Doctor McCoy, and Commander Hikaru Sulu returned to Ceti Alpha V in attempt to learn more about Khan's exile. In their search, they accidentally stumbled upon a sarcophagus for Marla that was built by Khan with Marla's mummified remains within. In another sarcophagus, likely meant for Khan, Spock found data tapes and records and Khan's personal journal. Before they left, the landing party were accosted by Ericsson's daughter and a few other surviving supermen and women who were exiled from the colony and demanded to know Khan's whereabouts, not knowing that he had left the planet and subsequently died. The young Ericsson also destroyed Marla's remains with a phaser she took from the landing party. Kirk managed to convince the young Ericsson that Khan was indeed dead and their fight was over. Then Kirk instructed Sulu to go back to the Mutara Sector, and he then beamed her ashes into the debris field created when the Genesis Planet exploded, so that she and Khan could at least be together. Kirk also hoped that as husband and wife were reunited that somewhere, somehow, Marla McGivers and Khan Singh have both finally found peace
See also
The Eugenics Wars: The Rise and Fall of Khan Noonien Singh - the two volume novel written by Greg Cox that tells the story of the Eugenics Wars, creation of Khan, and his rise to power.
