A Bad Case of Stripes is a children's book by David Shannon published in 1998 by Scholastic Press. A 2004 study found that it was a common read-aloud book for fourth-graders in schools in San Diego County, California. Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children."
Publication date
1998
A Bad Case of Stripes is a children's book by David Shannon published in 1998 by Scholastic Press . A 2004 study found that it was a common read-aloud book for fourth-graders in schools in San Diego County, California . [1] Based on a 2007 online poll, the National Education Association named the book one of its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children." [2]
Plot summary
A girl named Camilla Cream loves lima beans but doesn't want to eat them because she wants to fit in. One day she wakes up to discover stripes on her body. Her parents then call the doctor. The doctor then determines that Camilla can still go to school. Unfortunately, once she gets to school, the other kids taunt her by calling out colors so that her color changes. She is then sent home, because the teachers are worried that the stripes may be contagious................ The doctor brings in other doctors to examine Camilla's case. He gives her bitter pills to take before bed. However, after taking a pill, Camilla wakes up to find herself transformed into a pill. The doctor calls in further experts, while by this time, Camilla is recognized by the media as the "amazing transforming kid". While the experts talk to each other, debating whether it's a virus, bacteria, or fungus, the outbreak spreads on Camilla, continuing until her face grows roots, berries, crystals, feathers, and a long furry cat tail, rendering her unrecognizable. When a spiritual counselor confronts Camilla, telling her to "become one with her room" she does exactly that, and melts onto the walls of her bedroom, taking control of the bed, the dresser, and two picture frames as her face. Eventually, an old lady who is "sweet as a strawberry" visits Camilla, and offers her lima beans. At first she rejects them, still feeling self-conscious, but she reconsiders before the woman leaves. The lady finally tosses the beans into Camilla's mouth. The walls swirl, and Camilla transforms into a girl again. And everything went back to normal.
