Drum, Girls & Dangerous Pie is a book aimed at children and young teenagers, and was the 2004 debut novel from author Jordan Sonnenblick, originally published by DayBlue Insights and later by Scholastic. Publishers Weekly described it as "insightful". Sonnenblick, an English teacher and former student of author Frank McCourt, was inspired to write the novel by the real-life story of one of his own students.
Summary
The protagonist Steven, a talented drummer, narrates the story during middle school graduation in June, discussing in the novel the previous ten months about his struggles of his little brother's cancer. In the beginning of the novel, Steven's brother Jeffrey has been acting strangely. Finally, Steven finds out that Jeffrey has cancer. Everyone at his school starts to notice him because his brother is sick. Towards the end of the story, Steven leaves his big fundraiser concert to go to the hospital with Jeffrey. It turns out he had an ear infection and Steven missed his performance for that. Later, Steven asks about Sam, a friend he met at the hospital who also has cancer, and finds out she had died and her sister never came to her. The story ends with Steven's eighth grade graduation.
Characters
Steven Alper- Steven is the protagonist, a drummer and an eighth grader. Steven has a sense of humor and is highly annoyed by his little brother at the beginning of the story. He feels he is neglected at most parts, he is in love with Renee Albert as well as a friendship with Annette. Steven is a really good student and has a normal life but when his little brother Jeffery is diagnosed with cancer everything changes.
Jeffery Alper- Jeffrey, or 'Jeffy' is Steven's little brother who is diagnosed with ALL , acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Jeffy is described by Steven as being 'too cute.' Jeffrey is a really adorable 5 year old as said in the book with blond hair (which he loses). He looks up to Steven and adores him dearly.
Annette Watson- Annette is a smart friend of Steven's and sometimes watches Jeffy. She has an unknown crush on Steven, but sees that he likes Renee, and is sad, but not hopeless. Steven was tutored by her when he was failing his classes. She later teams up with Renee to help raise money for Jeffrey at their spring concert. Finally Steven sees that he likes her as well because he begins to fall in love with her.
Renee Albert- Renee is a cheerleader and math whiz. She is the object of most guys' affections. Steven, though decides that Renee does not pay attention to him for the right reasons, so ends up liking Annette. In the end she and Annette come together to help Steven's brother.
Mr. Watras- Steven's music teacher of the All-City Jazz band. He is Steven's favorite teacher and his mentor.
Miss Palma-Steven's English teacher. She is the teacher that gives Steven the journal assignments, in which Steven talks about his brother.
Mrs. Galley - Steven's guidance counselor at his school. Steven talks to her a lot about his problems, mainly about Jeffrey having cancer and about a dream that he starts having that Jeffrey dies in the winter as Steven throws varying objects at him.
Samantha - Steven's friend he meets at the hospital who also has leukemia. She ends up dying alone without her sister. She leaves Steven with the advice to stay with his brother every time he needs him.
Mrs. Alper_- This is Steven's mother She is caring and loving to both of the kids, but it gets so hard when they find out Jeffery has cancer. When she finds out that Jeffrey has cancer she has to be in and out of Philadelphia with Jeffrey and leave behind Steven and her husband. She gets very upset and is very timid throughout the book
Mr. Alper- Mr. Alper is the dad of the 2 boys. It also gets really difficult when Jeffery gets cancer because he has to pay all of the bills. Whenever his wife calls from Philadelphia he just can't tell Steven the news about Jeffrey. When they found out that Jeffrey had cancer he would not say a word to Steven. But at the end he does and has an emotional heart touching moment with Steven.
Mr. Stoll- Steven's drum instructor. After a financial problem with hospital bills, Mr. Stoll lets Steven have drum lessons for free.
Biff-a bad boy at school, and also Renee Albert's boyfriend.
