Enna Burning is a fantasy novel by Shannon Hale. It is the second book in her Books of Bayern series, following the character Enna, who befriends the title character in The Goose Girl.
Plot Summary
The story picks up from where the first book leaves off, shortly after it ends. It is set mainly in Bayern, a kingdom divided into forests and towns, with a Medieval technology. It is on the other side of the mountains from Kildenree, where the first book began. Enna and Princess Isi (Ani) became fast friends in The Goose Girl .
After the end of the first book, Enna returned to the forest to live with her older brother, Leifer. Finding a vellum scroll while in the forest, Leifer learns the secret of 'Fire Speaking', but he is unable to control his fire, or his temper, from 'flaring up'.
Enna goes to the city hoping to talk to Isi about Leifer's new power with fire. But Isi is unable to manage her own ability to communicate with some animals and the wind since the end of the first book.
The neighbouring country of Tira invades Bayern. Enna and her friends, Razo and Finn, travel to the front where they meet Leifer. He is anxious to use his power with fire to fight, but dies in the battle.
When Enna finds Leifer's body, she finds the vellum and learns its secrets. She then makes a series of rules for herself, which she hopes will allow her to fight in the war without meeting the same fate as her brother.
Enna goes on a series of raids with her old friends, but finds she is unable to keep the promises she made to herself. When her friends try to stop her from more sabotage raids, she runs away and is captured.
Tiran Captain Sileph uses herbs to drug Enna so she can't use her power of fire to escape. He tries to brainwash her into teaching him the secret of fire and fighting for Tira. Razo and Finn try to rescue her but are captured during their attempt.
Enna gradually gives in to Sileph's persuasive skill of speaking to people. She believes he loves her, and falls victim to Stockholm Syndrome .
While Sileph is away at a battle, the guards forget to drug her. She fights her way out of the camp and escapes to fight for Bayern and tries to end the war, even if it means her own death.
Before she succumbs to her wounds from using too much fire, her friends find her. The last part of the book follows Enna and Isi trying to find a cure in a neighbouring kingdom to balance the fire and wind that is killing them.
The trip takes months and along the way, Enna has to face Sileph and a band of Tiran soldiers. His charisma has worn thin for her and his troops, and they fight.
Enna and Isi finally return home at peace to their friends and families.
Characters
Enna - A headstrong Forest girl who worked in the city for several years, and befriended Isi. She comes to realize how much Isi's, Razo's, and Finn's friendship has matured and changed.
Isi - The Queen of Bayern, she knows wind-speaking and animal-speaking (She can talk to birds and some animals). She is friends with Enna, from her time as a goose girl, in the first book. She was the princess of Kildenree, known as Ani in The Goose Girl . Her full name is Anidori-Kiladra Talianna Isilee.
Sileph - A Tiran captain of fifty, who captures Enna. He tries to brainwash her into falling in love with him, and fighting for Tira. He has the "gift" of people-speaking, and uses it to manipulate Enna and others.
Finn - A Forest boy who secretly loves Enna. He is quiet and gentle; although, forced by war, to fight to protect his friends and home, with grim determination.
Geric - The King of Bayern and Isi's husband.
Razo - A short, funny Forest boy who has no great, fighting skills, but is very friendly and a good scout.
Leifer - Enna's older brother. Leifer learned fire-speaking; but, is later killed in battle, using this skill.
Awards and nominations
A New York Public Library Book for the Teen Age
An Amazon Editor's Pick for Best Middle Grade Book of the Year
AML 2004 Young Adult Fiction Award
A Sonderbooks Standout 2004
2004, USA, Bloomsbury USA Children's Books ISBN 1-58234-889-8 , Pub date 26 August 2004, Hardback
2005, UK, Bloomsbury Publishing PLC ISBN 0-7475-7573-8 , Pub date 7 November 2005, Hardback
