The Wish List is a fantasy novel by Eoin Colfer. It chronicles the adventures of Meg Finn, a teenage girl killed in a gas explosion who must earn her place in Heaven by returning to Earth to help the pensioner she attempted to rob. Eastside Films is now developing The Wish List as a feature film.
Meg Finn - The protagonist, a rebellious teenager.
Lowrie McCall - The old man with many regrets whom Meg and Belch tried to rob.
Belch Brennan - The main antagonist; a teenage thug who commits crimes in his spare time.
Elph - An AI help computer program made by Myishi in his own image.
St. Peter - The saint who decides whether or not a soul is allowed into heaven.
Beelzebub - Satan's right-hand demon.
Minor characters
Franco- Meg's stepfather, an abusive and lazy man who is addicted to TV.
Flit - A tunnel mite with a grammar problem. Charged with collecting soul residue from the walls of the tunnel leading to Heaven and Hell.
Raptor- Belch's dog, with whom he later merges.
Cicely Ward - A famous old friend of Lowrie McCall's whom he wishes to kiss as part of his Wish List.
Deshie - A bouncer who works at Cicely Ward's studio, brother of Murt(Murte).
Murt(Murte) - A security guard at Croke Park, brother of Deshie.
Satan - The leader of Hell , portrayed as a businessman focusing on quotas.
Myishi - An annoying computer geek who lives in Hell. He created Elph. Similar to Foaly in Eoin Colfer 's Artemis Fowl books. This name is also found in the book Supernaturalist.
Brendan Ball - A bully who humiliated Lowrie at school.
Portrayal of relationship between Heaven and Hell
Unlike many novels about the relationship of Heaven to Hell and the traditional Judeo-Christian portrayal, Hell is not a place of eternal pain and torture, more akin to Purgatory. For instance, Satan does not always take pleasure in killing or torturing others, seeing it more as a given role than a personal pleasure. Beelzebub is also tasked with all of Satan's inane duties, including handling the capture of Meg Finn herself. Likewise, Heaven is not completely pure, as Saint Peter seems to take pleasure in sending souls to limbo instead of through the Pearly Gates, as well as letting souls through that aren't completely pure. Saint Peter also pokes fun at his own station and Heaven itself; at the end of the book, when Meg is let through to Heaven, he comments that the 'Pearly Gates' aren't exactly pearly; it just sounded more appealing than 'Hole in the Sky'.
Connections
Myishi is a company in The Supernaturalist , another children's book written by Eoin Colfer so it is possible that Myishi was the founder of the company originally. Colfer said at the EIBF 2008 that this was also purposeful, as he wants his books to be set in the same universe, and then compared his universe to Marvel's.
Meg Finn shares her surname with Conor Finn, the alter ego of Conor Broekhart, the protagonist of Eoin Colfer's book Airman and with Colfer's son, Finn Colfer.
