Daniel's Story is a children's novel by Carol Matas, telling the story of a young boy's experiences in the Holocaust in World War II. It is honored at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C. by means of an exhibit.
Mother (Died in the gas-chambers of the Auschwitz-Birkenau extermination camp, in the Auschwitz complex)
Father (lives till the end and, sith his advice, is the reason of Daniels survival)
Erika (The younger sister of Daniel who plays the violin at the Auschwitz band, but died after the liberation of starvation)
Uncle Peter (Husband of Leah and the favorite uncle of Daniel. Was arrested for a parking ticket. He was eventually cremated by the Nazis, and his (or somebody else's) ashes were sent back to Auntie Leah)
Opa Samuel (Died)
Peter (a young boy that Daniel meets and befriends near the end of the book, he is killed by anti-Semitic youths in Poland, ironically after surviving the gas chambers)
Oma Rachel (deported because she was in the hospital, along with her husband.)
Uncle Leo (died)
Uncle David (Daniel's uncle that moved to U.S)
Uncle Walter (Deported)
Uncle Aaron (Daniel's uncle that moved to England)
Auntie Leah (Daniel's strict aunt who was shot in the second part of the story, while trying to save her daughters from deportation).
Auntie Hannele (Died of being starved and shot for rebelling)
Oma Miriam (Made Daniel a Hitler youth uniform. Killed herself from overdose of sleeping pills a month after Daniel's bar mitzvah)
Opa Karl (Died before the story takes place)
Friedrich (Daniel's cousin and the son of Auntie Leah and who soon to be Daniel's friend)
Mr. Schneider (Daniel's German teacher who doesn't like Jews)
Rosa (Daniel's first love/was part of the Lodz resistance group/fiance at the end)
Karl (Daniel's boss in the Photography Studio at Buchenwald, and a part of the resistance.)
Adam (Daniel's friend while in Auschwitz. Is killed by SS Soldiers while rebelling, and was part of the Lodz resistance.)
SS Soldiers (Recurring throughout the story)
Auntie Anna (died)
Mia, Gertrud, and Brigitte (Friedrich siblings that were killed)
Nathan, Jakob, and Georg (Leo and Anna's children that were killed)
Grace (A good friend of Daniel's)
Sections
Pictures of Frankfurt
In this Chapter Daniel (the narrator) start describing us all the pictures that has in his photo album.
Pictures of Lodz
