"Light In The Attic" redirects here. For the record label, see Light in the Attic Records. A Light in the Attic {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=200px|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}Author(s) Shel SilversteinIllustrator Shel SilversteinCover artist Larry MoyerCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) Children's poetryPublisher Harper & RowPublication date 1981Pages 169ISBN 0-06-025673-7OCLC Number 7574216 A Light in the Attic is a collection of poems by the American poet, writer, and children's author Shel Silverstein. It was first published by Harper & Row in 1981. The poems for children are accompanied by illustrations also created by Shel Silverstein.
Controversy
Attempts have been made to ban the book from some libraries, parents claiming that the poem "How Not To Have To Dry The Dishes" encourages messiness and disobedience. [1] The poem "Little Abigail and the Beautiful Pony" led to more criticism for describing the death of a girl after her parents refuse to buy her a pony. This led the book to be banned by the Fruitland Park Elementary School in Lake County, Florida . [2] The decision, however, was later reversed by an advisory committee of parents and teachers. [3] Other complaints included the mention of supernatural themes, including demons , devils , and ghosts . [3]
Poems
A Light in the Attic: A light shines bright in the attic of an abandoned house, and the narrator reflects on the person "looking out" as he looks inside.
How Many, How Much - A narrator explains that certain things, like the number of "slams in an old screen door" and the love contained within days, can't be captured in something as simple as numbers.
Moon-Catchin' Net
Hammock: A boy has everything he needs to relax—a hammock from his grandmother, and a breeze from God...if only someone would move the trees closer together.
How Not to Have to Dry the Dishes: Shel offers some advice as to how to get out of drying dishes—namely, deliberately dropping one on the floor.
Stop Thief! – When a crook steals a man's knees, he must call the police for help, as he can't pursue the thief himself.
The Sitter - Mrs. McTwitter doesn't know much about baby-sitting, as she takes the "sitting" part of the job extremely literally.
Prayer of the Selfish Child - A child recites "Now I lay me down to sleep" before bed, but changes the last few lines, asking God to break all of his toys in the event of his death.
What Did? – What some objects say to other objects.
Shaking – A girl tries to make a milkshake by shaking a cow.
Signals
Picture Puzzle Piece
Put Something In - Shel encourages children to "put some crazy in the world," be it a poem, dance, song, or story.
Monsters I've Met- Shel talks about his encounters with creatures including a ghoul, a witch, and a devil—but unfortunately, the monsters never want anything besides small favors and advice.
Rock 'n' Roll Band – A few children wonder what it would be like to be a rock band.
Something Missing – A man gets dressed, not realizing he forgot his pants.
Memorizin' Mo
Somebody Has to
Reflection
Fancy Dive - A girl named Melissa attempts the most elaborate, complicated dive in the history of the world—but it's only after she has begun her routine that she realizes that she is jumping into an empty pool!
Here Comes - Shel talks about the coming season of summer, and how quickly it flies by.
The Dragon of Grindly Grun - The Dragon of Grindly Grun lives a quiet life as he breathes fire, burns knights to a crisp, and captures beautiful maidens. There's only one problem: he prefers his damsels medium well..."but they always come out well done!"
Blame
Never
Day After Halloween – Someone tries to sell monster heads the day right after Halloween.
Wavy Hair – A man believes that he has wavy hair, but when he shaves it off, he discovers that his hair was actually straight—it's his head that is wavy!
Longmobile - An enormously lengthy car is the perfect mode of transportation—once you get inside, it is already where you need to be!
Backward Bill – A story about a cowboy who does everything backwards.
Mr. Smeds and Mr. Spats
Snake Problem - A boy runs into an issue when he meets a ten-foot python that twists itself into a frightening shape: the words "I love you!"
Bear in There
The Pirate
Hurk
Anchored - When some children prepare to go on a sailing expedition in a homemade boat, they realize that their enormous anchor might end the trip earlier than originally anticipated.
Unscratchable Itch - A man complains of having an itch right in the center of his back—the one place that he cannot reach.
Squishy Touch –- A girl has a problem: Whatever she touches turns to raspberry Jell-O.
Importnt?-- A lowercase 'a' insists that he is necessary for earth and heaven to exist, but a wise capital 'G' points out that they would go on even without the little letter.
Thumb Face – A man suffers having a face on his thumb that thinks everything the man does is funny.
Homework Machine – A girl tries to use a machine to do her homework, but the answers come out wrong—mainly because the boy inside trying to answer the questions doesn't know how to perform addition.
Eight Balloons
Musical Career – A girl has trouble when trying to play the piano.
Anteater – Someone buys an anteater who eats their aunt.
Buckin' Bronco
Snap! – A girl gets caught in an umbrella.
Overdues
Wild Strawberries
How to Make a Swing With No Rope or Board or Nails
Gumeye Ball - An eyeball sits in the middle of a gumball machine, which Shel takes as a sign: he's had too much gum.
Hot Dog
Adventures of a Frisbee - A Frisbee, tired of being used as a toy, travels the world trying out different jobs, including being a dinner plate and a truck wheel. He eventually decides that he likes his old life best of all, and returns to it.
Come Skating - Miscommunication makes a skating trip less than fun when a child brings roller skates to a frozen pond.
The Meehoo with an Exactlywatt – Two creatures—a Meehoo and an Exactlywatt—approach someone's door. Their strange names cause problems reminiscent of " Who's on First? "
Cloony the Clown – A clown tries to be funny, but he isn't funny enough. He eventually shares his sad story with a circus crowd...but they laugh uproariously at his misfortune, prompting Cloony to cry.
Tryin' On Clothes – A child struggles to put on other people's clothes.
Shapes
