The Fire Within is a 2001 children's fantasy novel written by Chris d'Lacey. It has a sequel named Icefire, which is followed by Fire Star, The Fire Eternal, Dark Fire, Fire World, and The Fire Ascending.
Plot summary
When David moves in with Liz and Lucy Pennykettle, he discovers a collection of hand crafted, clay dragons (made by Liz) that come to life and have magical powers. As a gift from Liz, David receives a personalized dragon, Gadzooks, who can forecast the future using his paper and pencil. Gadzooks inspires David to write a story which reveals the truth behind an unsolved mystery close to home; the story, called "Snigger and the Nutbeast," has an unhappy ending, and when David realizes the consequences of that unhappy ending he becomes angry with Gadzooks and the story. David finds Gadzooks crying and near death (shedding his "Fire Tear"), and he discovers that these special dragons die when they are not loved. Soon David is forced to save his friend and unlock the very real power of the Fire Within.
Characters
Elizabeth Pennykettle (Liz) - The landlady who makes mysterious clay dragons that come to life. Her special dragon is Guinevere.
Lucy Pennykettle - Liz's daughter, an 11-year-old girl who strongly believes in dragons, but can be very mischievous. She also loves squirrels and tries to find them. Her special dragon is Gwendolen. She also pushes David to write stories about squirrels and their adventures in Wayward Crescent.
David Rain - The main character of the series. David is Liz's tenant, and he goes to Scrubbley College. He has written a book called Snigger and the Nutbeast and tries to publish it. He as well has a writing dragon named Gadzooks.
Gadzooks - Is David's clay dragon that helps him write.
Guinevere - Guinevere, a woman from the far past, caught Gawain's fire tear. She bore one daughter who carries the original fire and passes it down through the years. She is also an ancestor of Liz and Lucy Pennykettle.
Gwendolen - Guinevere's child, made from clay, flesh and blood. She is the ancestor of Suzanna Martindale (introduced in Icefire,2nd book of the series).
Gwilanna - An evil sibyl who helps Guinevere and conjures Gwendolen for her.
Gawain - The last dragon who shed his fire tear for Guinevere.
Henry Bacon - The Pennykettle's next-door neighbor.
Sophie Prentice - A girl who works at the animal shelter.
Greenfingers George (Mr. Digwell) - Scrubbley's gardener for the library gardens.
Conker - Lucy's favorite squirrel
Bonnington - The Pennykettle's cat
