The Power of the Dog is a 2005 crime/thriller novel by Don Winslow, based on the DEA's involvement with the War on Drugs. The book was published after six years of writing and research by the author. Art Keller, through tenacity, skilled experience, and what he once thought of as luck, positions himself as a strategic piece in the DEA's war on drugs. His career really begins in a boxing ring, where he is pummeled a great deal, forced to use every skill he has, engage his tactical mind in order to survive, and still loses the three-round bout. But from the blood, pain and street-wise cunning, it appears that he has won the real match, but he's still one step behind in the greater game. The next 29 years his life is a repeat of that sparring match. In a high powered story of political forces, and brutal mentalities, Art Keller attempts to do his job, while not becoming a victim of his obsessions. Following Keller and the other characters of this novel, Don Winslow positions us as witnesses to tremendous crimes, and horrific destruction, while listening to members of both sides of this 'war' declare victory and prosperity from the engagements that leave towns destroyed and families murdered. While The Power of the Dog is a novel, the tremendous effort in historic and cultural research by the author is very evident.
LC Class
PS3573.I5326 P69 2005
The Power of the Dog is a 2005 crime/thriller novel by Don Winslow , based on the DEA 's involvement with the War on Drugs . The book was published after six years of writing and research by the author.
Art Keller, through tenacity, skilled experience, and what he once thought of as luck, positions himself as a strategic piece in the DEA's war on drugs. His career really begins in a boxing ring, where he is pummeled a great deal, forced to use every skill he has, engage his tactical mind in order to survive, and still loses the three-round bout. But from the blood, pain and street-wise cunning, it appears that he has won the real match, but he's still one step behind in the greater game.
The next 29 years his life is a repeat of that sparring match. In a high powered story of political forces, and brutal mentalities, Art Keller attempts to do his job, while not becoming a victim of his obsessions. Following Keller and the other characters of this novel, Don Winslow positions us as witnesses to tremendous crimes, and horrific destruction, while listening to members of both sides of this 'war' declare victory and prosperity from the engagements that leave towns destroyed and families murdered.
While The Power of the Dog is a novel, the tremendous effort in historic and cultural research by the author is very evident.
Contents
