Tales of the Vampires is a five issue American comic book limited series (later collected in a single trade paperback), published by Dark Horse Comics and set in the Buffyverse. It comprises an anthology of short stories written by Joss Whedon, Jane Espenson, Ben Edlund, and Drew Goddard. Each story tells the tale of one or more Buffyverse vampires, and the otherwise unrelated collection is strung together by a bridging story written by Whedon. The anthology is presented as a series of stories told by an ancient vampire to a group of young Watchers. Tales of the Vampires is the tale of that storytelling session and functions as a bridge among the other items in the anthology. The stories in this series are generally considered to be an official part of the Buffyverse canon. Dark Horse published a new one-shot special based on the Tales of the Vampires concept by Becky Cloonan, Vasilis Lolos, Gabriel Bá and Fabio Moon in June 2009. Specifically, this one-shot is a tie-in with the Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight storyline following "Harmonic Divergence" in which vampires become very popular with the public at large.
At a Victorian Watcher's academy, the instructors are teaching a group of young Watchers about vampires by allowing them to hear tales from a particularly evil vampire captive, Roche.
The Problem with Vampires
Paul Lee
Days before the events of " School Hard ", we see how Spike and Drusilla leave Prague amongst chaos.
Drusilla has been captured by a human inquisitor and thrown into a Prague jail. The inquisitor proceeds to torture Drusilla in a unique chair built for that purpose in 1478. He hopes Dru will remember the pain forever, serving as a warning to other vampires to stay away from the people of Prague.
Drusilla tries to recount the things that make her happy, including little girls lost at the fair and little boys wandering too far from home, so that she can forget the torture. Spike is lying imprinted into the ground under the bridge he was thrown from by a Prague mob that shoved a stake into his chest, inches from his heart, not dusting him so that he can flee and warn other vampires to stay away from Prague. He then moves across the city, finds Drusilla, and dispatches her captor.
Spike picks up a damaged Drusilla and carries her out the door, headed for a first showdown with a Slayer in a town with a Hellmouth called Sunnydale .
Stacy
Cameron Stewart
A young teenage vampire named Stacy explains how, whilst human, she was enchanted by the idea of magic. Stacy's tale starts with her explaining that she is different and special because she understands magic. As she tries to explain this to her two friends, Jason and Dwayne, during a Lord of the Rings showing that captivates her, we learn that she remains isolated in her beliefs.
After the movie, in her vision of magic she is an elf princess, battling orcs. In reality, she spends time battling her friend Jason's unwanted advances. Stacy again reminds us that most people think her magic is silly, but then surprises us by stating that most people have never been murdered either. We are then taken through Stacy's siring at a party from which she rises up after two days in the bushes. No one found her in all that time.
This young girl then becomes connected--"evil, but connected." She finally realizes that the magic lies not with the solitary elves, but with the orc hordes, the monsters. She claims her magic with a band of other vampires.
Published (January 14, 2004) cover by Ben Templesmith [4]
Title
