The Moving Target is a 1949 mystery novel, written by Ross Macdonald. This is the first Ross Macdonald novel to feature the character of Lew Archer, who would define the author's career. Lew Archer is hired by the dispassionate wife of an eccentric oil tycoon who has gone missing. Archer must dig through a strange cast of Los Angeles characters, finding crime after crime before he can get to the job he was hired to do. The novel became the basis for the 1966 Paul Newman film Harper, thanks in no small part to screenwriter William Goldman. Ross Macdonald (Kenneth Millar) originally titled this book The Snatch. When the book was published, he chose the pseudonym John Macdonald after his father, John Macdonald Millar. It is believed he didn't want to use his own name as his wife, Margaret Millar, was already an established writer.
The Drowning Pool
The Moving Target is a 1949 mystery novel, written by Ross Macdonald .
This is the first Ross Macdonald novel to feature the character of Lew Archer , who would define the author's career. Lew Archer is hired by the dispassionate wife of an eccentric oil tycoon who has gone missing. Archer must dig through a strange cast of Los Angeles characters, finding crime after crime before he can get to the job he was hired to do.
The novel became the basis for the 1966 Paul Newman film Harper , thanks in no small part to screenwriter William Goldman .
Ross Macdonald (Kenneth Millar) originally titled this book The Snatch. When the book was published, he chose the pseudonym John Macdonald after his father, John Macdonald Millar. It is believed he didn't want to use his own name as his wife, Margaret Millar , was already an established writer.
Santa Teresa
In this book, Macdonald created the fictional city of Santa Teresa a version of Santa Barbara, California . [1] In the 1980s, Santa Teresa became home to Kinsey Millhone , a fictional female private investigator created by Sue Grafton . [2] Millhone is the protagonist of Grafton's "alphabet mysteries" series of novels. [3] [4] Grafton chose the setting as a tribute to Macdonald. [5]
^ Priestman, Martin (2003). The Cambridge Companion to Crime Fiction . Cambridge University Press. 
^ Everett, Todd (1991-05-23). "Mystery Town: Whodunit author Sue Grafton lines in Santa Barbara and sets her tales in Santa Teresa". Los Angeles Times . p. J15. 
^ Hawkes, Ellen (1990-02-18). "G IS FOR GRAFTON Instead of Killing Her Ex-Husband, Sue Grafton Created a Smart-Mouthed, Hard-Boiled (and Incidentally Female) Detective Named Kinsey Millhone". Los Angeles Times Magazine. p. 20. 
^ Natalie Hevener Kaufman, Carol McGinnis Kay (1997). "G" Is for Grafton: The World of Kinsey Millhone (Hardcover ed.). Henry Holt and Company. ISBN   0-8050-5446-4 . 
