Dolores Claiborne is a 1992 psychological thriller novel by Stephen King. The novel is narrated by the title character. Atypically for a King novel, it has no chapters, double-spacing between paragraphs, or other section breaks; thus the text is a single continuous narrative which reads like the transcription of a spoken monologue. It was the best selling novel of 1992 in the United States. The book is dedicated to King's mother: "For my mother, Ruth Pillsbury King."
Plot summary
While being interrogated, Dolores Claiborne wants to make clear to the police that she did not kill her wealthy employer, an elderly woman named Vera Donovan whom she has looked after for years. She does, however, confess to the murder of her husband, Joe St. George, almost 30 years before, after finding out that he sexually molested their fourteen-year-old daughter, Selena. Dolores's "confession" develops into the story of her life, her troubled marriage, and her relationship with her employer.
Style
Unlike many other works by King, there is little focus on the supernatural ; [3] the only such event in the book are two telepathic visions, which, along with the solar eclipse backdrop, form a link to King's novel Gerald's Game . [4] However, reviewer Sean Piccoli observed the novel otherwise contains "vintage bone-yard King: the tiny town, the secret lives. Murder and mayhem lurk reliably behind the tranquil veneer."[ citation needed ]
Dolores Claiborne was adapted into a 1995 film directed by Taylor Hackford . It starred Kathy Bates as Dolores, with Jennifer Jason Leigh as her daughter Selena, and Judy Parfitt as Vera Donovan. [5]
In January 2012, San Francisco Opera announced its premiere as part of its Fall 2013 season lineup, starring Dolora Zajick as Dolores, and Elizabeth Futral as Vera. On August 26, 2013, San Francisco Opera announced that Dolora Zajick needed to withdraw from the production, and that Patricia Racette would assume the title role for the first four performances, with Catherine Cook singing the final two performances. [6]
