Strong Poison is a 1930 novel by Dorothy L. Sayers, her fifth featuring Lord Peter Wimsey.
Plot introduction
In Strong Poison, Lord Peter first meets Harriet Vane , an author of police fiction. The immediate problem is that she is on trial for her life, charged with murdering her former lover. If Lord Peter does not prove she is innocent, he will lose her before he even persuades her to accept his proposal of marriage. But all the clues point to Harriet as having given Philip Boyes the arsenic that killed him.
Explanation of the novel's title
The title is derived from a phrase in some variants of the ballad Lord Randall , where the title character was poisoned by his lover.
Plot summary
Mystery author Harriet Vane has been accused of the murder of her former lover, Phillip Boyes. Boyes was a novelist and essayist who wrote in support of atheism , anarchy, and free love . Professing to disapprove of marriage, he persuaded a reluctant Harriet to live with him against her principles and they led a Bohemian life in the London art community. A year later he proposed, and Harriet, outraged at being deceived into giving up her public honour, broke off the relationship.
During the year that followed, Boyes suffered from repeated bouts of gastric illness, while Harriet had bought several poisons under assumed names to test a plot point of her novel then in progress. Having returned from a holiday in North Wales in better health, Boyes dined with his cousin, the solicitor Norman Urquhart, before going to Harriet's flat to discuss reconciliation. That night he was taken fatally ill, apparently with gastritis. He died four days later after an agonising period of suffering.
Although it was assumed at first that Boyes died of natural causes, an indiscreet nurse and some of Boyes' friends insisted that foul play was involved. A post-mortem revealed that Boyes' death was due to acute arsenic poisoning . Apart from the evening meal with his cousin, where every item was shared by two or more people, the only opportunity for poison to have been administered appeared to be in a cup of coffee, offered by Harriet Vane.
Harriet is tried, but the result is a "hung" jury, thanks in no small part to the presence of Wimsey's aide, Miss Climpson, on the jury. Under English law as it was at the time, a unanimous verdict was required. With the jury unable to reach unanimity on a verdict, the judge must order a fresh trial to be held.
Wimsey visits Harriet in prison, declares his conviction of her innocence, and promises to catch the real murderer. In the course of the interview he also admits his intention of marrying her, an offer which she politely but firmly declines. Working against time before the new trial, Wimsey first explores the possibility that Boyes took his own life. Wimsey's friend, Detective Inspector Charles Parker , conclusively disproves this notion, but Wimsey has planted a spy, Miss Joan Murchison, in Urquhart's office and discovers the real culprit is Urquhart.
Suspecting Urquhart's story that he, not Boyes, is in line to inherit the considerable fortune of their senile great-aunt, Wimsey sends Miss Climpson to get hold of the great-aunt's will, which she does in a comic scene exposing the practices of fraudulent mediums . Not only does the will name Boyes as the principal heir, but in Urquhart's office, Miss Murchison finds evidence that, misusing his position as his own family's solicitor, Urquhart embezzled the majority of the great-aunt's holdings and subsequently lost them on the stock market . Urquhart knew that if his great-aunt died, he would be exposed. Boyes, however, was unaware that he was heir to the money. With him dead, Urquhart would inherit the estate and hence his fraud would not be revealed. Miss Murchison also discovers a packet of arsenic hidden in Urquhart's office.
Wimsey has now established motive and means, but not opportunity. But after re-examining the details of Boyes' famous last dinner (and perusing A.E. Housman's A Shropshire Lad , in which the poet likens reading dark poems to King Mithridates' self-immunization against poisons), he realises that Urquhart laced an omelette with arsenic and shared it with Boyes after having built up an immunity to the poison with small doses over a long period. (This possibility was accepted by the science of the time, but it is now believed that long-term consumption of arsenic would cause many health problems.) [1] Wimsey tricks Urquhart into an admission before witnesses.
At Harriet's retrial the prosecution presents no case and she is set free. Exhausted by her ordeal, she again rejects Wimsey’s proposal of marriage. Lord Peter does finally persuade Parker to propose to Peter's sister, Mary. Also the Honourable Freddy Arbuthnot, Wimsey's friend and contact for the stock market, finds a long-delayed domestic bliss with Rachel Levy, the daughter of the murder victim in Whose Body? .
Lord Peter Wimsey – protagonist, nobleman and amateur detective
Harriet Vane – protagonist, author of detective fiction
Philip Boyes – Harriet's former lover, now deceased
Norman Urquhart – Solicitor and Boyes' cousin
Rosanna Wrayburn, aka "Cremorna Garden" – great-aunt of Boyes and Urqhart, sometime stage performer, now senile and bedridden
Charles Parker – police detective; Wimsey's future brother-in-law
Miss Katharine Climpson – spinster and enquiry agent on Wimsey's behalf
Miss Murchison – typist and employee of Miss Climpson
Lady Mary Wimsey – Peter's younger sister, engaged to Parker;
Literary significance and criticism
...highest among the masterpieces. It has the strongest possible element of suspense – curiosity and the feeling one shares with Wimsey for Harriet Vane. The clues, the enigma, the free-love question, and the order of telling could not be improved upon. As for the somber opening, with the judge's comments on how to make an omelet, it is sheer genius. [2]
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
Strong Poison was adapted for television in 1987 as part of a series starring Edward Petherbridge as Lord Peter and Harriet Walter as Harriet Vane.
It was adapted for radio three times:
Broadcast
