The Empty Copper Sea (1978) is the seventeenth novel in the Travis McGee series by John D. MacDonald. In it, McGee looks into the apparent drowning of Hub Lawless in a boating accident. His $2 million insurance policy leads some to believe he has faked his death. The title of the book is taken from a passage in Chapter 13 on page 218 of the first printing of the hardcover edition. The sentence reads "I turned my head and saw, beyond the shoulder of my beloved, the empty copper sea, hushed and waiting, as if the world had paused between breaths. " Sam Elliott played McGee in the television movie of The Empty Copper Sea, titled Travis McGee (1983). Inexplicably, the film eliminated the Florida locales so central to the McGee novels, making the adventurous crime-solver a resident of California instead.
The Green Ripper
The Empty Copper Sea (1978) is the seventeenth novel in the Travis McGee series by John D. MacDonald . In it, McGee looks into the apparent drowning of Hub Lawless in a boating accident. His $2 million insurance policy leads some to believe he has faked his death.
The title of the book is taken from a passage in Chapter 13 on page 218 of the first printing of the hardcover edition. The sentence reads "I turned my head and saw, beyond the shoulder of my beloved, the empty copper sea, hushed and waiting, as if the world had paused between breaths."
Sam Elliott played McGee in the television movie of The Empty Copper Sea, titled Travis McGee (1983). Inexplicably, the film eliminated the Florida locales so central to the McGee novels, making the adventurous crime-solver a resident of California instead.
Plot Summary
A wealthy landowner/investor named Hub Lawless has disappeared off the west coast of Florida; supposedly fallen overboard during a storm and drowned. The captain of the boat, Van Harder, is blamed, having been found drunk and passed out when the boat returned to shore. But not is all as it appears and it's possible that the dead man faked his own death and is, instead, living in Mexico with a lover, avoiding the eventual failure of his businesses.
Harder comes to McGee, asking him to salvage his reputation as a boat captain. He has placed a value of $20,000 on his "good name" and has offered $10,000 to McGee in payments over time to find out the truth of what happened.
McGee and Meyer travel to the Gulf Coast of Florida, undercover as investors, to find out the truth of what happened. Over the course of the investigation, McGee meets Gretchen, who features prominently in the next book, "The Green Ripper".
References
Merril, Hugh (2000). The Red Hot Typewriter: The Life and Times of John D. MacDonald. Thomas Dunne Books/St. Martin's Minotaur. ISBN   978-0-312-20905-6 . 
Geherin, David (1982). John D. MacDonald. F. Ungar Pub. Co. ISBN   978-0-8044-2232-1 . 
