Then Again, Maybe I Won't is a young adult novel written by Judy Blume. Intended for pre-teens and teenagers, the novel deals with puberty from a male perspective as well as the other trials of growing up. Judy Blume claimed that she was inspired to write the story following the success of her preceding novel Are You There God? It's Me, Margaret. Given her earlier novel was about a girl entering puberty making the transition to womanhood, she decided to write one about a boy going through puberty and making a transition to manhood.
Plot summary
Tony Miglione lives with his family in a middle-class neighborhood in Jersey City, New Jersey . After acquiring surplus wealth from his father's invention, the family relocates to an upper-class community in Rosemont, New York, where Tony meets a seemingly-polite and respectful neighborhood boy, Joel Hoober. But Joel's clean-cut mannerisms conceal his criminal side. Guilty of crimes like prank calls, underage drinking, and shoplifting, Joel encourages Tony to participate as well.
In the meantime, Tony develops an infatuation with Joel's beautiful teenage sister Lisa, motivating him to take up spying on her through the window as she undresses. He simultaneously handles the same changes undergone by his family's adaptation to their new lifestyle, as his mother has adopted social-climbing behavior, and his brother's wife gives birth to a baby girl nicknamed Vickie, and she soon reveals a new pregnancy.
Tony also becomes acquainted with a girl named Corky, who exhibits slight unrequited romantic feelings toward him, and he is enrolled in therapy after Joel's temptations have caused him to faint , as he fears for his friend's tendencies and negative influence.
Eventually, Tony overcomes his infatuation with Lisa after learning of her relationship with another boy, and ends his friendship with Joel after he has been caught snatching golf balls. As the two boys agree to separate, Joel reveals his father's intentions to enlist him in a military academy, and that all along his motivation for his behavior was the convenience of his parents' constant preoccupation and lack of time for him. Tony also reconsiders abandoning his old habits of spying on Lisa in the final paragraphs of the book, although it is hinted that he might not give it up entirely.
Major characters
Anthony (Tony) Miglione — Protagonist of the book who is 13 years old, the youngest of three boys.
Victor (Vic) Miglione — Tony's father, who is a freelance electrician and an inventor whose invention changes their life.
Carmella Miglione — Tony's mother, who eventually goes by the name Carol, much to Tony's dismay.
Ralph Miglione — Tony's older brother who is a teacher at his middle school in Jersey City, NJ, but goes into the family business with his dad, which angers Tony to no end.
Grandma — Carmella's mom, who cannot speak after having her larynx removed due to cancer. She loves to cook, but was no longer permitted to do so after hiring their housekeeper, so she spends every day in her bedroom watching TV, depressed.
Vincent (Vinnie) Miglione — Tony's deceased older brother. He died in Vietnam a few years before the story takes place.
Angie Miglione — Tony's sister-in-law, and Ralph's wife.
Vincenza (Vickie) Miglione — Tony's niece, and Angie and Ralph's daughter. She was named after Vinnie.
Joel Hoober — Tony's new friend in Rosemont. He's a practical joker and a shoplifter.
Marty Endo — Another one of Tony’s new friends.
Scott Gold — Another new friend of Tony’s.
Lisa Hoober — Joel's attractive 16 year old sister, who Tony develops a crush on, and spies on her through his window with binoculars
Kathryn (Corky) Thomas — A girl Tony’s age who likes him, but he pays her little attention.
J.W. Fullerbach — Vic's new boss and partner.
Frankie Bollino — Tony’s best friend from Jersey City who comes to visit him.
Dr. Fogel — Tony's psychiatrist.
Maxine — Housekeeper to the Migliones who directs the house her way and won't let Tony's grandmother cook anymore.
Millicent - Housekeeper to the Hoobers who seems to be the only one who is aware of Joel's antics because one night when Tony is at Joel's house she catches them in Lisa's room and warns Joel that God will punish him someday for giving her a hard time.
Theme
While this novel is similar to aspects of Are You There God? It's Me, Margaret , it differs mainly in the secondary themes. While Margaret struggled with her issues of religion and being raised in an interfaith family , Tony Miglione struggles with the issues of his family's social status and to a lesser extent, American society. A similarity of both stories, aside from the physical maturity of both characters, is that Tony develops a crush on the eldest daughter of his next door neighbors, just as Margaret had feelings for her neighbor's friend. However, Tony also has to deal with the fact that she is three years older than he is, and that if such a crush developed further the age difference would be uncommon among guys he knows. Both stories also dealt with moving from an urban area to the suburbs , but the reason behind the move for Tony's family is his father's success with his invention and desire to move to a wealthier community.
Themes dealt with include the effects on Tony of losing the working-class life he had been used to in his Italian-American neighborhood in Jersey City, and being ill at ease in his new upper-class community. In addition, Tony's grandmother has been marginalized, as she loved to cook for the family in Jersey City and was told that this would be inappropriate in their new home. She confines herself to her room after the Migliones hire Maxine, a maid who takes advantage of the family's inexperience with their new lifestyle, and essentially directs the household to her taste instead of taking orders from the family.
The penultimate chapter in the book deals with the consequences of Joel's immoral actions. Tony and Joel are at a sporting goods store where the employees successfully catch Joel shoplifting golf balls and Tony refuses to aid Joel in lying. Tony anticipates that his parents will learn for themselves of Joel's true nature when they read tomorrow's newspaper and see Joel will be remanded to the juvenile facility, but is surprised when he learns the owner of the sporting goods store declines to press charges against Joel for shoplifting . Joel's father then decides to enroll Joel in a military academy , which he believes will cure Joel of his "I will do what I want, when I want" attitude and deprive him of his pampered lifestyle at the Hoober home.
Setting
The time frame of this story is evidently the late 1960s or early 1970s, as Tony's eldest brother, Vinnie, has been killed in action in the Vietnam War . Initially set in Jersey City , New Jersey , the family eventually moves to Rosemont, New York on Long Island. Other themes touched upon are how Tony's family seems to be knowingly and willingly distancing themselves from their Italian heritage as not many Italian-Americans live in Rosemont (evidence of this is shown when Tony's mother allows herself to be called "Carol" by Mrs. Hoober instead of Carmella, her true name). Another theme is how Tony's family is keeping up with the Joneses by emulating their next door neighbors, the Hoobers (although Tony's mother is clearly more concerned with social image than his father). Mr. Hoober is vice president of a pharmaceutical company and is apparently extremely well compensated, which gives his wife the chance to spend her days playing golf and socializing. The Hoobers are representative of the "high-powered American family" and seem to believe the "American way" is about money, affluent living, social status and not much else. As a result, they do not seem to give much attention to the trouble-making son Joel, who has the idea he can get away with anything because nobody is watching over him or enforcing discipline.
