For the film of the same name, see The Lincoln Lawyer (film) The Lincoln Lawyer {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=200px|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}Author(s) Michael ConnellyCountry USALanguage EnglishGenre(s) crime fiction, mysteryPublisher Little, Brown (USA), Orion (UK)Published in English October 3, 2005Media type PrintPages 404ISBN 0-316-73493-4OCLC Number 60311867Dewey Decimal 813/.54 22LC Classification PS3553.O51165 L56 2005Preceded by The ClosersFollowed by Echo Park The Lincoln Lawyer is a 2005 novel, and it is the 16th novel written by American crime writer Michael Connelly. It is the first featuring Los Angeles attorney Mickey Haller, half-brother of Connelly's mainstay detective Hieronymus "Harry" Bosch.
Plot summary
Moderately successful criminal defense attorney Mickey Haller operates around Los Angeles County out of a Lincoln Town Car (hence the title) driven by a former client working off his legal fees. While most clients are drug dealers and gangsters, the story focuses on an unusually important case of wealthy Los Angeles realtor Louis Roulet accused of assault and attempted murder. At first, he appears to be innocent and set up by the female "victim."
However, Roulet's lies and many surprising revelations change Mickey's original case theory, making him reconsider the situation of Jesus Menendez, a former client serving time in San Quentin State Prison after pleading guilty to a similar and mysteriously related crime.
In the end, Haller outmaneuvers Roulet (revealed to be a rapist and murderer) without violating ethical obligations, frees the innocent Menendez, and continues in legal practice, though not without much self-examination and emotional baggage .
Mickey Haller - criminal defense lawyer
Margaret McPherson - Haller's ex-wife, prosecuting attorney
Louis Ross Roulet - the accused
Ted Minton - prosecutor in Roulet's case
Jesus Menendez - former client of Haller
Dwayne Corliss - jailhouse snitch
Reggie Campo - alleged victim of Roulet
Martha Renteria - Menendez's alleged murder victim
Raul Levin - Haller's investigator and colleague in Roulet's case
Lorna Taylor - Haller's manager and ex-wife
Cecil C. Dobbs - the Roulet family Lawyer
Mary Windsor - Louis Roulet's mother
Detective Howard Kurlen - the lead detective on the Jesus Menendez case
Detectives Lankford and Sobel - two cops who investigate Levin's murder
Main article: The Lincoln Lawyer (film)
A film adaptation, starring Matthew McConaughey as Haller and Marisa Tomei as Maggie McPherson, was released on March 18, 2011. The film is directed by Brad Furman from a screenplay by John Romano, and produced by Stone Village Pictures. Lionsgate holds the US distribution rights, and Lakeshore Entertainment holds international rights. [1] [2]
Awards
The novel received a lot of attention from the mystery community. It won the 2006 Shamus Award and Macavity Award for "Best Novel". [3] [4] It was also nominated in the 2006 Anthony Awards for the same honour. [5] Additionally, in 2010 it was nominated in the "Best Mystery Novel of the Decade" category of the Barry Awards , although lost to Stieg Larsson with his The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo . [6]
