Gregor and the Marks of Secret is the fourth book in the Underland Chronicles by Suzanne Collins. It picks up soon after the end of Gregor and the Curse of the Warmbloods.
Plot
The story takes place in New York where 8-year-old Lizzie is preparing for camp and 12-year-old Gregor is preparing for his echolocation training in the Underland with Ripred. Mrs. Cormaci now knows about the Underland and gives Gregor some pasta to bring to Ripred. Gregor rides Nike, the princess of the bats to the city of Regalia. When under the palace, Ripred informs Gregor that there is one more prophecy that Gregor is in called the "Prophecy of Time". But whenever Gregor asks anyone about the prophecy, no one will answer. Gregor then finds that the Bane has been brought to his lessons, and grown to an even 8'. Ripred taunts the Bane repeatedly and is finally attacked by him. Ripred reveals that the Bane's real name is Pearlpelt and that Snare was Pearlpelt's father. Later, Gregor receives an invitation to a party from Hazard and his soon-to-be bond and joker, Thalia. When Gregor returns with a camera, he goes to Ripred to tell him that he gives up on echolocation training, but once there, is attacked by The Bane's friends, Twirltongue and two other gnawers (rats). Twirltongue uses her persuasive words on Gregor, but lunges to attack him. His rager skills kick in during battle, but suddenly give away when he loses his flashlight, revealing that he can only fight if he can see and he needs echolocation more than he thought. He escapes and blocks the door, bumping into Vikus. Gregor asks Vikus about the strength of the door. When he says it will hold, a now relieved Gregor heads to the party with 3-year-old Boots. There, Gregor meets up with his mom. 12-year-old Luxa approaches Gregor and asks for a dance. Gregor agrees and afterwards takes one look down at Luxa and realizes he likes her. A crown lands right by them. They both realize that it's the crown Luxa gave to the nibblers (Underland word for mice) in case they were in need of help. Gregor, his bond Ares, Luxa, and her bond Aurora go to the nibblers' colony and find one of Luxa's friend nibblers dead. They also find a strange symbol on the ground that looks like a lowercase "r". Later, a group of baby nibblers were brought to the palace from the river in a woven basket. This causes Gregor, Ares, Luxa, Aurora, Howard, Nike, Boots, Hazard, and Thalia to inspect what is going on. A series of events happens including an earthquake, which blocks the entrance to which they were going to escape from. They now must go through Hades Hall to go back to Regailia. Later,Luxa develops a crush on Gregor. The team bumps into Photos Glow-Glow and Zap, and they agree to accompany them on the trip for the food they had packed. They find dead nibblers laying on the ground, but one nibbler is alive, a nibbbler named Cartesian. They then discover Ripred being tortured in a pit and rescue him. Gregor and Luxa strongly argue about who should be in charge. Suddenly,the wind currents blow their way and their fliers (bats) are nearly killed. They then spy on the Bane, and they learn that the Bane is planning on taking over the Underland. The team heads to a volcano and find that there is a colony of nibblers being herded toward it. They suddenly realize this and try to escape but fall to the ground, gasping for air. Gregor realizes that they are suffocating, and also that the nursery rhyme and song is actually a prophecy and that the part about the nibblers in a trap is happening right now. The nibblers suddenly stay still and when Boots says that they are sleeping, Gregor finally tells his three-year-old sister about dying. He then discovers that the queen in the prophecy is not Luxa, but the volcano. It erupts and engulfs the team in smoke. Gregor wakes up lying in a cave. He walks further in to the cave and find the team okay, but knows someone is dead when he sees their faces. He sees Hazard crying and finds Thalia lying in his arms, stone dead. Later, Ripred tells him that he must get his sword, but Gregor is confused at this since he has a sword, but Ripred says he needs Sandwich's sword. Before Gregor leaves to Regalia, Luxa asks why he helped her with the nibblers, and Gregor tells her that he did it because they saved her. The story ends with Gregor gazing at the sword in awe.
Prophecy
The Prophecy in this book is carved into the walls of an old nursery. It is a popular nursery rhyme of sorts, like Hey Diddle Diddle or Humpty Dumpty. Its meaning is unknown until about half way through, after the mass death of the nibblers at the volcano.
Dancing in the firelight, See the queen who conquers night. Gold flows from her, hot and bright.
Meaning: This verse talks about the volcano, and the light it gives off in the dark tunnels.
Father, mother, sister, brother, Off they go I do not know If we will see another
Meaning: This part refers to the fact that entire families of nibblers are headed toward the pit at the bottom of "The Queen"
Catch the nibblers in a trap. Watch the nibblers spin and snap. Quiet while they take a nap. Father , mother , sister , brother , Off they go. I do not know If we will see another.
Meaning: The nibblers are herded into a pit at the base of the volcano. As the poisonous gas is blown towards the mice, and away from the group by the currents, the nibblers start to writhe on the ground in search of air. At the end the mice appear to be napping (according to Boots). Whole families are killed, and the companions are concerned about the survival of the species.
Now the guests are at our door greet them as we have before. Some will slice and some will pour. Father, mother, sister, brother, Off they go. I do not know If we will see another.
Meaning: This verse talks about the rat's plan to invade Regallia The rats are the guests at the gates of the city. They have never been welcomed, and will be greeted with violence, as many times before. Some will slice, indicating the use of swords, and some will pour, which talks about pouring boiling oil over the wall and onto the army, which is a common Regalian tactic. The end talks about the perils of war, and how many will die.
Sequel
The sequel of this book is Gregor and the Code of Claw and it starts off with Gregor learning about the final prophecy.
The Prophecy of Time
