Shopaholic and Baby (2007) is the fifth novel in the popular 'Shopaholic' series. It is a chick-lit novel by Sophie Kinsella, a pseudonym of Madeline Wickham. It follows the story of Becky Brandon (née Bloomwood) and her husband Luke as they navigate Becky's first pregnancy.
Plot
The plot jumps several months forward from Shopaholic and Sister . Becky is now heavily pregnant with her first child and is preparing for the arrival of her newborn. During a sonogram appointment with Luke, Becky is briefly left unaccompanied in the ultrasound room. Desperate to know the gender of the baby despite Luke's wishes to the contrary, Becky takes the ultrasound equipment to find out for herself. She initially thinks see can see male genitals on the baby but the sonographer returns, catching Becky and explains what Becky is actually examining is her own bladder .
Back at the apartment, it's revealed that Becky and Luke have recently sold up in order to buy a house. The couple have difficulty finding a place which meets Becky's approval. Becky's relationship with Jess has drastically improved since the last novel as is evident when Jess arrives. Jess continues in her endeavor to make Becky more environmentally friendly, encouraging her to use second hand baby items, the mere prospect of which Becky finds horrifying. Becky's friendship with Suze has also improved despite Suze's involvement with Lulu, a mother introduced in the last novel whom Becky doesn't get along with. Once again, Becky and Luke's marriage has been strained due to increasing anxiety on Luke's part over a new business partnership with the Arcodas group.
While shopping at a luxury baby boutique, Bambino, Becky overhears a conversation about a celebrity obstetrician , Venetia Carter. Becky- fantasizing over the idea of a luxurious birthing experience- rushes home to consult Luke. Much to Becky's disdain Luke is firm and insists Becky remain a patient of Dr. Braine (An older obstetrician who has seen many of the Brandon women through their pregnancies. Becky finds him dull). After much nagging from Becky an exasperated Luke admits defeat and the couple attend an appointment with Venetia. Becky is taken aback when Venetia treats with little interest whilst being flirtatious with Luke. She is further upset when it's revealed Venetia and Luke used to date during their time together in college but she consoles herself with the knowledge Venetia is in a relationship.
At a later appointment Becky is distraught to learn that Venetia is newly single, her married boyfriend having returned to his wife. This sets alarm bells ringing for Becky. As the novel progresses, Becky grows more and more suspicious of the relationship between Luke and Venetia; even going as far as to hire a private detective. As the baby's impending birth draws ever closer, Venetia and Becky have a dispute during an obstetric appointment, wherein Venetia spitefully confesses that she believes Becky and Luke should never have married and that she has every intention to pursue Luke once the baby is born. Once Becky has recovered from the shock of this revelation she plans to out Venetia's plans to Luke, hoping he'll be similarly horrified. Becky arrives at the party Venetia and Luke are attending only to find the two dancing together. The stress of witnessing this causes her to pass out. When Becky comes around, Luke is apologetic but denies any romantic involvement with Venetia. The couple decide it's in their best interests to return to Dr. Braine and for a brief while, everything seems to be going smoothly.
During her baby shower, Becky unwittingly comes across a love note sent by Venetia in amongst gifts for the baby. Sneaking away from her own party, she goes to the birthing center in order to confront Venetia, pretending to be in early labor. Family and friends arrive at the clinic anticipating the baby's birth and when Venetia comes into the birthing room, Becky tells everyone present about the obstetrician's scheme. Luke, in disbelief, demands an explanation and becomes increasingly enraged as Venetia talks. As an argument begins, Luke reveals that Venetia has always been troublesome, once feigning a pregnancy in order to force Luke into a relationship he did not want. During the dispute Becky's waters break and Venetia is then ordered out of the room and Dr. Braine is called by another family member in order to assist during the birth.
Whilst revelations are coming out into the open, Becky takes this opportunity to explain that she and Luke are effectively homeless as the home they had planned to purchase has been bought from under them in the midst of all the trouble Venetia has caused. To console the labouring Becky, Suze offers she and Luke the family's summer home. Relieved, Becky and Luke are given some privacy whilst they prepare for the imminent arrival. Dr Braine assists in the delivery of Luke and Becky's child into the world, a daughter they name Minnie. The book ends with Luke, Becky and Minnie living a modestly in the Bloomwood family home.
The Secret Dreamworld of a Shopaholic (2000) also published as Confessions of a Shopaholic (2001)
Shopaholic Abroad (2001) also published as Shopaholic Takes Manhattan (2002)
