Five Red Herrings is a 1931 novel by Dorothy L. Sayers. It was retitled Suspicious Characters for its first publication in the United States, but reverted to its original title in subsequent printings. Sayers points out in the preface that all the places in the story are real places, and it is a fact that almost all the locations can be recognized and visited to this day. Some editions include as a foreword a letter written by Sayers "To my friend Joe Dignam, the kindliest of landlords," from which it becomes evident that she herself was in the habit of having holidays in Galloway - a habit attributed to Wimsey in the book - and that on one of them she promised her landlord to write a detective novel set in this area, of which the book was a fulfilment.
Plot summary
The story is set in Galloway , a part of Scotland popular with artists because of its landscapes. Sandy Campbell is a talented painter, but also a notoriously quarrelsome drunkard. When he is found dead in a stream, with a half-finished painting on the bank above, it is assumed at first that he fell in accidentally, fracturing his skull. Lord Peter Wimsey , who is in the region on a fishing holiday, points out the inconsistency which makes it impossible for Campbell himself to have worked on the painting. (Sayers is explicit in leaving the reader to work out what exactly the clue is.) Campbell's death is now a murder case.
Whoever killed Campbell also executed the painting in Campbell's distinctive style, to contrive the appearance of an accident. Six other artists in the region are talented enough to have achieved this, and had also had public brawls with Campbell in the recent past. Now Wimsey has to figure out "who done it" and who the five red herrings are. The task is made difficult because almost all the suspects are behaving in a suspicious manner; some have left the district unexpectedly and without explanation, others have given statements which are obviously inaccurate, or are clearly concealing facts. The policemen investigating other aspects of the case come up against inexplicable dead ends.
The Five Red Herrings is the Peter Wimsey story which is most obviously set as a puzzle for the reader. There is only a closed circle of suspects to deal with, and Wimsey has no emotional involvement, although, having alerted the Police to Campbell's murder, he subsequently reflects that Campbell was a man anyone might feel justified in killing, and that the six suspects are all generally decent people. He nevertheless resolves to uncover the truth, so that the five innocent artists should not live under lifelong suspicion.
The plot is told through the viewpoint of Wimsey, and of the various police investigating the case (including Wimsey's brother-in-law Charles Parker , involved because a suspect is in hiding in London). Large parts of the book follow the various Scottish police officers, who are shown as highly intelligent and competent, and for a time seem to overshadow Wimsey. In contrast, Bunter (Wimsey's manservant) plays a smaller role in this than in other Wimsey novels. Wimsey works in close co-operation with the police throughout the book; indeed, in one episode a character angrily accuses him of "entering people's homes as a police spy".
The six suspects are all eventually traced and give statements in which they deny killing Campbell. Some have convincing alibis, but others have none which can be verified. Finally, Wimsey, the Procurator Fiscal , the Chief Constable and the police officers involved in the investigation meet to review the evidence. Working from the knowledge the reader has been given, the police put forward several theories, implicating all of the suspects either as the killer or as accessories. Asked for his opinion, Wimsey finally reveals to the reader exactly what alerted him to the murder, and points the finger at the true killer. Although the police are sceptical, Wimsey offers to reconstruct the crime and over the course of twenty-four hours' strenuous activity, he demonstrates how the killer contrived the scene above the stream and established an alibi.
The killer finally realises that the case against him is unbreakable and confesses, but pleads that he killed Campbell in self-defence. When the case is tried, the jury decide that he is guilty of manslaughter (which carries a lighter sentence) rather than premeditated murder.
Literary significance
"A work that grows on rereading and remains in the mind as one of the richest, most colorful of her group studies. The Scottish setting, the artists in the colony, the train-ticket puzzle, and the final chase place this triumph among the four or five chefs d'oeuvre from her hand." [1]
List of characters
Mervyn Bunter : Wimsey's valet, who also assists in his investigations
Sandy Campbell: artist
Hugh Farren: artist and suspect
Gilda Farren: Hugh Farren's wife
Henry Strachan: golf club secretary, artist and suspect
Matthew Gowan: wealthy artist and suspect
Alcock, Mrs. Alcock, Hammond, Betty: Gowan's domestic staff
Jock Graham: rogue, artist and suspect
Michael Waters: English artist and suspect
John Ferguson: Campbell's next-door neighbour, artist and suspect
Miss Selby, Miss Cochran: artists who substantiate or break several alibis
Sir Maxwell Jamieson: Chief Constable of Dumfriesshire
Inspector Macpherson: Kirkcudbright Police CID
Sergeant Dalziel: Newton Stewart Police
PC Ross, PC Duncan:
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
Five Red Herrings was adapted for television in 1975 as part of a series starring Ian Carmichael as Lord Peter and Glyn Houston as Bunter. In 1978, an adaptation was made for BBC Radio 4 starring Carmichael as Lord Peter and with Peter Jones as Bunter.
References
^ Barzun, Jacques and Taylor, Wendell Hertig. A Catalogue of Crime. New York: Harper & Row. 1971, revised and enlarged edition 1989. ISBN 0-06-015796-8
