Beauty: A Retelling of the Story of Beauty & the Beast was first published in 1978 by children's book author Robin McKinley. It was her first book, retelling the classic French fairy tale La Belle et La Bete. The book was the 1998 Phoenix Award honor book. It was the 1966 -1988 Best of the Best Books for Young Adults.
Plot
Roderick Huston, a wealthy merchant, has three daughters; Grace, Hope, and Honour. When Honour was a child she said she'd rather be named after the virtue of beauty, a nickname which stuck. As she grows older, she feels the nickname is increasingly ill-fitting, as she remains plain while her sisters become lovelier and more socially adept. Grace becomes engaged to one of her father's ship captains, Robert Tucker, and Hope to a blacksmith named Gervain Woodhouse. When all of Huston's ships are lost at sea, Robert is presumed dead and the family become destitute. They are forced to move to the countryside, near Gervain.
A year passes. The family slowly adapt to their new lives and Hope has two children with Gervain. One day they receive news of one of Huston's ships arriving back into port. Huston leaves the next day.
Huston returns home sooner than everyone expected, with a beautiful rose. He explains that on his way home through the forest he became lost in a storm, and happened across a mysterious castle. Inside he was given shelter and waited on by invisible servants. As he was leaving the next day, he found a beautiful rose garden and plucked a single rose for Beauty. The owner of the castle, a terrifying beast, appeared, furious that Huston would steal from him after his hospitality. The Beast agreed to let him go on the condition that one of his daughters must return and live in the castle.
Despite her family's pleas, Beauty insists that she go. As the months pass, Beauty comes to enjoy living in the castle. She grows close to the Beast, but cannot bring herself to love him and refuses his marriage proposal every night. When Beauty becomes homesick, the Beast gives her a magic mirror that allows her to see her family. In it she sees Grace agreeing to marry the local minister, despite still loving Robert. Beauty begs to visit her home and tell Grace before it's too late, promising to return in a week and stay with the Beast forever afterwards. The Beast reluctantly allows her to go.
When Beauty arrives home her family is overjoyed, but quickly become disheartened when they learn she's leaving again. During the days without the Beast, Beauty begins to recognize how she truly feels about him. At her family's behest she agrees to stay a while longer, but quickly rushes back to the castle when she has a dream about the Beast dying. Beauty discovers him nearly dead. Realizing her true feelings, she confesses her love and tells him that she will marry him. In an instant the enchantment on the Beast and the castle is broken.
The Beast is returned to his handsome human form, explaining to the astonished Beauty about a curse on family lineage and how it could only be broken by someone loving him despite his appearance. He shows Beauty her reflection, revealing how she has blossomed into a true beauty. Beauty is reunited with her family, and she and the Beast start their new lives together.
Review
ALA Booklist has called it "a captivating novel," and Publishers Weekly has called it "a splendid story." [2]
