The Elements of Moral Philosophy, by James Rachels and Stuart Rachels, is a textbook regarding the field of ethics. It explains a number of moral theories and topics, including Cultural relativism, Subjectivism, Divine command theory, Ethical egoism, Social contract, Utilitarianism, Kantian ethics, and Deontology. The book uses multiple real-life examples to better explain the theories. James Rachels wrote the first edition in 1986. He revised the book three times, adding a chapter on "The Ethics of Virtue" in 1993 and a chapter on "Feminism and the Ethics of Care" in 1999. The fourth edition appeared in 2003, the year Rachels died. Since then, his son Stuart has written the fifth edition and the sixth edition, which was released in April 2009. The book has been translated into Italian, Portuguese, Chinese, Indonesian, Korean, Spanish, Norwegian, and Albanian. It is known for its accessibility.
The Elements of Moral Philosophy, by James Rachels and Stuart Rachels , is a textbook regarding the field of ethics . It explains a number of moral theories and topics, including Cultural relativism , Subjectivism , Divine command theory , Ethical egoism , Social contract , Utilitarianism , Kantian ethics , and Deontology . The book uses multiple real-life examples to better explain the theories.
James Rachels wrote the first edition in 1986. He revised the book three times, adding a chapter on "The Ethics of Virtue" in 1993 and a chapter on "Feminism and the Ethics of Care" in 1999. The fourth edition appeared in 2003, the year Rachels died. Since then, his son Stuart has written the fifth edition and the sixth edition, which was released in April 2009. The book has been translated into Italian, Portuguese, Chinese, Indonesian, Korean, Spanish, Norwegian, Persian and Albanian. It is known for its accessibility.
http://www.jamesrachels.org/stuart/EMP.htm Stuart Rachels' discussion of the sixth edition of the book
http://www.jamesrachels.org/ James Rachels' website
This article about a philosophy -related book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
