Five Get Into Trouble is the eighth novel in The Famous Five series by Enid Blyton. It was first published in 1949. In this novel, Dick gets kidnapped, mistaken for another boy whose name is Richard. The Famous Five track him down to a lonely, out-of-the-way house-but they are seized and imprisoned too...
Five Fall Into Adventure
Five Get into Trouble is the eighth novel in The Famous Five series by Enid Blyton . It was first published in 1949. In this novel, Dick gets kidnapped, mistaken for another boy whose name is Richard. The Famous Five track him down to a lonely, out-of-the-way house-but they are seized and imprisoned too...
Plot summary
The five are allowed to go on a cycling holiday after a lot of argument .While there they meet a boy called Richard Kent.His father is rich but fierce and once had a bodyguard named Rookie.Whom Richard didn't like and made a false plan to kick him out of their life.Richard asks the five to let him share the trip and promised to leave to his aunt's house at the end of the day if his mother gives him permission. They agree and Richard joins them. However Richard never asked permission and when he arrives to his aunt's he finds her away, as he leaves he gets chased by a car driven by Rookie. When he reaches the five he reveals the truth. Meanwhile Rookie's associates mistake Dick for Richard and kidnap him. The rest and Richard trace Dick to Owl's Den and on the way watch a man throwing clothes down a well.When they arrive they sneak in to the house but are caught and imprisoned themselves. Julian escapes in the house and finds a secret room with a man sleeping in it. The next morning Rookie sees Dick and explains his associates mistake. At this point the five are nearly free but Richard is recognized and they are held prisoner again. When one of the gang plans to go out the five plan to hide someone in the boot of his car. Richard proves his worth by agreeing to be the one. He escapes in the boot and goes to the police. When they arrive Julian shows the police the secret room which contains an escaped convict. The gang planned to help him leave the country in return for a share of the goods he stole and managed to hide.Richard goes home where he finds his worried parents waiting for him and five join them for a treat from Richard's parents for helping him from a great trouble .It ends with happy faces.
