Power of Three is a 1976 fantasy children's novel by Diana Wynne Jones. The novel, a bildungsroman for the adolescent character Gair, discusses the relationship among three different races in a manner that can be read as a parable of race relations in humans.
Lymen
Lymen live in villages inside huge, hollow mounds. They fear the Giants and are at war with the Dorig. They operate their magic/technology with Words. They are warlike and like hunting, but they usually will not kill unless they have to. A few have special attributes called Gifts which enable them to use a special magical skill (e.g. see the future). Their clothes are the color of the Moor, so they can camouflage with the long grasses, shadows, and trees. They look like humans, but are a little smaller, thinner, and have almond-shaped eyes which are the same colour as a human's. Their Power comes from the Sun, the Middle Power.
Dorig
Dorig live in halls under water. They have airlocks and working pumps. They, too, fear the Giants and they are at war with the Lymen. The Dorig have only the barest minimum of knowledge about Words and do not seem to have Gifts, but can shapeshift. They are rather peaceful, but are not reluctant to kill. Their real clothes are soft, and made of fish-skins that are prepared to shift shape along with the Dorig that is wearing them. When Dorig come to the surface, they don a hard, scaly armour that covers them head to foot and also shifts shape along with them. They are as tall as Lymen, very pale with a greenish tinge to their skin, and have large, yellow eyes. Their accent has a lilting sound, and they trail their s's. Their Power comes from the Moon, the Old Power.
Giants
Giants are humans. They have machines that work by themselves, great big pieces of metal that smell bad and take them where they want, great strength, loud voices, boxes that release sound, and objects which they use to fire stone-like round things that can hurt or kill. The Lymen and the Dorig fear them, but the humans are unaware of the Lymen and Dorig. They wear many-coloured clothes with much decoration that fasten in "mysterious ways" (zippers). Their Power comes from the Earth, the New Power.
Characters
The main characters of this book are three Lymen siblings: Ayna, Ceri and Gair. Both Ayna and Ceri are blessed with "Gifts". Ayna can tell the future, and Ceri can find anything that has been lost and can put thoughts on people. Putting thoughts on people is like controlling someone or something's actions by putting a hex on it. Gair is supposedly without a Gift but later on is revealed to have one.
Other characters include:
Adara - Mother of Ayna, Ceri and Gair. She is said to be very wise and beautiful.
Gest - Father of Ayna, Ceri and Gair. He is chief of Garholt, which is the biggest mound. He is often called a Hero, and is known for being charismatic and unique. He mysteriously completed three tasks to win Adara's hand in marriage.
Orban - Adara's brother; uncle to Ayna, Ceri and Gair. He is chief of the Otmound mound.
Ondo - Orban's son and cousin to Ayna, Ceri and Gair. The three kids hate him for being an obnoxious bully. His distinguishing feature are ears that stick out like a sheep's.
Kasta - Orban's wife, and the spoiling mother of Ondo. Known for having a voice like a duck's.
Gerald - A giant that tries to help the threesome. He and Gair are particularly good friends, because they can relate to one another. They are both rather lonely and melancholy.
Brenda - Another, very fat, giant. She and Gerald are fighting when the threesome first meet them.
Hafny - A Dorig that Ayna, Ceri and Gair befriend. He is much more open-minded than most Dorigs, and occupies roughly the same place in Dorig society as Gair does in Lymen society.
Halla - Hafny's sister. She has a tendency to be rather unintelligent and stereotypically minded.
