A Feast for Crows is the fourth of seven planned novels in the epic fantasy series A Song of Ice and Fire by American author George R. R. Martin. The novel was first published on 17 October 2005 in the United Kingdom, with a United States edition following on 8 November 2005. In May 2005 Martin announced that the "sheer size" of his still-unfinished manuscript for A Feast for Crows had led him and his publishers to split the narrative into two books. Rather than divide the text in half chronologically, Martin opted to instead split the material by character and location, resulting in "two novels taking place simultaneously" with different casts of characters. A Feast for Crows was published months later, and the concurrent novel A Dance with Dragons was released on July 12, 2011. Martin also noted that the A Song of Ice and Fire series would now likely total seven novels. A Feast for Crows was the first novel in the sequence to debut at number one on The New York Times Best Seller list, a feat among fantasy writers only previously achieved by Robert Jordan and Neil Gaiman. In 2006 the novel was nominated for the Hugo Award, the Locus Award, and the British Fantasy Society Award.
Plot summary
The War of the Five Kings is slowly coming to an end. Stannis Baratheon has gone to the aid of the Wall, where Jon Snow has become Lord Commander of the Night's Watch . King Tommen Baratheon , Joffrey's eight-year-old brother, now rules in King's Landing under the watchful eye of his mother, the Queen Regent Cersei Lannister . With Tywin and Tyrion gone, as well as no longer having to deal with Joffrey, there are no more checks on Cersei and she is essentially Ruling Queen of the Seven Kingdoms in all but name. Now that Cersei finally stands at the height of power and her enemies are scattered to the winds, in a grim irony it quickly becomes clear that she is incapable of wielding the power she has killed and manipulated so many to acquire, and she spirals into self-destruction. Brienne, the Maid of Tarth, is on a mission to find Sansa Stark – falsely believed to have absconded after conspiring with her husband, Tyrion, to murder King Joffrey. Brienne's mission is aided by Jaime Lannister, who sets her this task, honouring the oath he swore to Catelyn Stark, in an effort to redeem himself.
Meanwhile, Sansa Stark is still in hiding in the Vale, protected by Petyr Baelish , who has secretly murdered his wife Lysa Arryn and named himself Protector of the Vale and guardian of eight-year-old Lord Robert Arryn .
In the Seven Kingdoms
Prologue in Oldtown
Pate, a young apprentice at the Citadel in Oldtown , is studying to become a maester. He has stolen an important key to a depository of books and records at the request of a stranger in exchange for a reward. After delivering the key, the stranger double-crosses and kills Pate by poison.
King's Landing
It soon becomes apparent that while Cersei is skilled in the methods of intrigue needed to seize power, she is not very skilled in the actual day-to-day running of the kingdom. Cersei's reign is marked by rampant cronyism as she tries to solidify her rule by staffing her councils with incompetent loyalists. She also disregards well-meaning and accurate, if blunt, advice from her uncle Kevan Lannister and her brother Jaime, alienating them both. Making matters worse is Cersei's increasing distrust of the Tyrells , particularly Margaery , who wed the new boy king Tommen after his brother Joffrey died at their wedding. She becomes increasily paranoid over a prophecy, told to her by a witch when she was a little girl, which states that she will see her children crowned, but all of them will die before her, that she will lose her crown to another queen, one younger and more beautiful before she dies at the hands of the Valonquar (little brother in High Valyrian, which Cersei has always taken to mean Tyrion ). Her belief in this prophecy makes Cersei determined to somehow destroy Margaery Tyrell.
Her reign runs into problems from massive debt from before and during the war, compounded by her incompetent administrators' inability to resolve the situation. Most of the debt is owed to the Iron Bank of Braavos and the Faith of the Seven . Cersei flippantly brushes off representatives of the Iron Bank, needlessly antagonizing them by announcing that she is deferring their payment for the (indefinite) duration of the continuing rebellions. The Iron Bank retaliates by freezing all of the realm's assets, refusing to grant new loans while calling in all outstanding debts, which leads to a banking crisis that nearly cripples the economy of Westeros. To settle the crown's debts to the Faith of the Seven, Cersei agrees to the restoration of that religion's military order , the Faith Militant, ignoring the Faith Militant's history of causing trouble for the monarchy and the large number of zealots that are gathering both in the city and in Westeros, many of whom believe the accurate charges of adultery leveled against her. Cersei does not have the foresight to realize that this is only trading one problem for another, as once the Faith has armed soldiers at its command it feels less compelled to accept her authority.
Hoping to weaken the Tyrell influence over the court, the masses, and King Tommen, Cersei dispatches Ser Loras Tyrell to lead an army and force a quick (and she hopes foolhardy) end to the siege of Stannis Baratheon's forces on Dragonstone. The island fortress is taken, but at horrific cost; a thousand men are lost during the storming of Dragonstone's keep (not simply footmen, but many knights and squires), and Ser Loras himself is gravely injured by boiling oil and left clinging to life. Cersei tactlessly gloats about Loras's horrific injury to his sister Margaery. Rather than lessening the threat from the Tyrells, this action drives Margaery Tyrell to actively pursue destroying Cersei, causing the Tyrell-Lannister alliance to crumble. A scheme to have the Faith put Margaery on trial for mostly invented accusations of adultery backfires (although Margaery is imprisoned by the Faith, they acknowledge the evidence against her is extremely weak) when the newly-powerful religious leadership arrests and imprisons Cersei herself on similar (and accurate) charges.
Riverlands
After a series of disagreements over several issues Cersei dispatches her twin brother, Jaime , to the Riverlands to re-establish order and royal control in the war-torn region. He has become somewhat estranged from his sister, seeing her slipping into paranoid megalomania all too reminiscent of the Mad King, and newly concerned with his own honor tarnished by past misdeeds. He is also deeply disturbed about the state of the Kingsguard, with Cersei raising unworthy knights to the elite group. After ending the siege of Riverrun bloodlessly, one of the last holdouts against his family's authority, he receives word that Cersei wants him to return and defend her in a trial by combat. However, Jaime learns that Tyrion's accusation that Lancel Lannister and Cersei were having an affair was true (Lancel had been King Robert's true killer, put up to it by Cersei). Jaime also receives news of her involvement in the disastrous siege of Dragonstone. This waste of loyal soldiers and betrayal of much-needed allies is the last straw for Jaime, who burns Cersei's letter and abandons his sister to her fate.
Brienne of Tarth 's quest for Sansa leads her all over the Riverlands, where she observes the devastation and villainy that the war has wrought among the smallfolk. She notices a boy following her and confronts him, revealing Podrick Payne, former squire to Tyrion Lannister. Since he has had no real training, she agrees to teach him, promising to send him to bed with blisters and bruises every night. She also meets up with Ser Hyle, a knight from her past who was with her and King Renly before he was murdered. He believes that she did not kill Renly and he joins her on her quest, witnessing her battle prowess when she confronts three outlaws. She also meets up with Lord Randal Tarly (Samwell's father), who despises her and insults her despite Ser Hyle's praise of her courage and honor. Eventually she is captured by the Brotherhood Without Banners and sentenced to death by Lady Stoneheart, a reanimated Catelyn Stark , who wrongly believes Brienne has betrayed her. Brienne is told she will be allowed to live if she agrees to find and kill Jaime Lannister, giving her a choice between the noose (for her own neck) or the sword (for Jaime's). Refusing to decide, she and some of her companions are hanged, but as the nooses tighten she screams out one undisclosed word.
The Eyrie
In the Eyrie , Sansa poses as Petyr's bastard daughter Alayne, befriending young Robert Arryn, managing the household for her "father," and receiving from him informal training in royal politics. During this time, Petyr appears to be carefully manipulating his murdered wife's former bannermen, and his once precarious hold on the Protectorship of the Vale is beginning to seem less tenuous. He eventually reveals that he has betrothed Sansa to Harrold Hardyng , Robert's heir; when the sickly Robert dies, Sansa will reveal her true identity and reclaim her family stronghold of Winterfell , aligning it with the Vale in the process.
Iron Islands
On the Iron Islands , Aeron Damphair calls a Kingsmoot in order to decide who would succeed Balon Greyjoy as king of the Iron Islands. Hotly contested by Balon's brother Victarion Greyjoy and daughter Asha Greyjoy , eventually his brother, Euron Greyjoy , the exiled "Crow's Eye", is chosen as king due to his promise that he can control dragons with a recently acquired horn, which will help the islanders conquer all of Westeros. Asha wanted to make peace with the mainland while they were still ahead, and Victarion wanted to continue raiding, but Euron intends to conquer the entire continent outright. Asha and Victarion realize this is absurd, as the Ironborn do not have the numbers for this, nor are their forces skilled at land warfare. The fleet of the Iron Men attacks and captures the Shield Islands at the mouth of the river Mander, threatening House Tyrell's seat at Highgarden. Victarion considers this mere show however, estimating that when the Redwyne fleet returns (from the siege at Dragonstone) it will retake the islands. However, Euron sends him east to woo Daenerys Targaryen on his behalf, seeking to wed her and thus gain a claim to the Iron Throne. But Victarion decides to woo her for himself and pay Euron back for having slept with his wife years earlier.
Dorne
In Dorne , Doran Martell is confronted by three of his brother Oberyn 's eight bastard daughters—known collectively as the Sand Snakes—who all want justice for their father's death. They are not appeased by the prospect of receiving the head of Gregor Clegane , since it was Oberyn himself who killed him. They all want war, but in a different manner. They are inciting the commonfolk, so Doran has seven of the eight Sand Snakes confined to cells in the palace, even the very young ones, so that no one can use them against him.
A bold attempt by Doran's daughter Arianne Martell and her lover, Ser Arys Oakheart of the Kingsguard, to crown Doran's ward Myrcella Baratheon as queen of Westeros under Dornish law is thwarted by Doran. In the confusion Darkstar attempts to kill Myrcella; she survives but her face is scarred and Ser Arys is killed in the attempt on her life. This strains the new alliance with House Lannister and the Iron Throne, even as another member of the Kingsguard is on his way to Dorne with the head of Gregor Clegane, the knight who raped and murdered Doran's sister Elia years before. Though angry with his daughter, Doran reveals to her that he has long had his own subtler plan for vengeance. Her brother Quentyn has gone east to bring back " Fire and Blood ."
At the end of the novel, Samwell Tarly arrives at the Citadel to begin his training. He meets a fellow apprentice who introduces himself as Pate, finally connecting the prologue to the rest of the narrative.
In the East
Jon Snow has ordered Samwell Tarly to sail to the Citadel in Oldtown (via Braavos) where he can research the Others and study to become a Maester (this is revisited from Jon's point of view in the next book). Sam is accompanied by aging Maester Aemon, the wildling mother Gilly, her newborn babe, and sworn brother Dareon. The voyage across the Narrow Sea is underway before Sam realizes Jon swapped the sons of Gilly and Mance Rayder. The ruse was meant to protect the Wildling "prince" from Melisandre's fiery sacrifice but as a result Gilly's son is at risk, causing her much grief. Aemon gets very sick and they need to wait in Braavos for his health to improve, costing them their ride. Seeming to give up on his vows and companions, Dareon indulges in many harborside sins. After a Summer Islander tells Aemon about seeing the dragons firsthand, Aemon decides that Daenerys has come to fulfill a prophecy. Driven to help his niece fulfill her destiny, Aemon dies shortly after they leave Braavos. Brought together by their own grief, Sam and Gilly become intimate.
Arriving in Braavos, Arya Stark finds her way to the House of Black and White, a temple associated with the assassins known as the Faceless Men. As a novice there, Arya attempts to master their belief that Faceless Men have no true identity by both throwing all her treasures into the water (except her sword, Needle, which symbolizes all she has left behind) and posing as a girl called "Cat of the Canals". Once a month (on the night of the black moon) she must tell her mentor, the Kindly Man, three new words and three new things. However, her former identity continues to assert itself in the form of wolf dreams, and also when she kills Dareon, sworn brother of Samwell Tarly, for abandoning the Night's Watch. Sam and "Cat" meet briefly without knowing one another. The morning after Dareon's murder, she admits to the Kindly Man that it was "Arya" who committed it, and is given a glass of warm milk as punishment. She wakes up the following morning blind.
Characters
The story is narrated from the point of view of 12 characters and a one-off prologue point of view. Unlike its predecessors, the fourth novel follows numerous minor characters as well.
Prologue: Pate, a novice of the Citadel in Oldtown
Cersei Lannister , The Queen Regent
Ser Jaime Lannister , Lord Commander of the Kingsguard
Brienne, Maid of Tarth , a young warrior woman searching for Sansa and Arya Stark
Sansa Stark , pretending to be Petyr Baelish 's bastard daughter "Alayne Stone" (by which name her later chapters are known)
Arya Stark , later referred to as "Cat of the Canals", beginning her training at the Temple of Him of Many Faces in the free city of Braavos
Samwell Tarly , a sworn brother of the Night's Watch
In the Iron Islands:
The Prophet, The Drowned Man: Aeron "Damphair" Greyjoy , Self-proclaimed servant of the Drowned god, youngest of Late King Balon's three surviving brothers
The Kraken's Daughter: Princess Asha Greyjoy , daughter of Late King Balon of the Iron Islands
The Iron Captain, The Reaver: Prince Victarion Greyjoy , Captain of the Iron fleet, one of Late King Balon's three surviving brothers
In Dorne:
The Captain of Guards: Areo Hotah , Captain of the Guards to Prince Doran Martell of Dorne
The Soiled Knight: Ser Arys Oakheart of the Kingsguard
The Queenmaker, The Princess in the Tower: Arianne Martell , daughter of Prince Doran and heir to Dorne
