Justice Hall is the sixth book in the Mary Russell series by Laurie R. King. In this installment, Mary Russell has accepted her tumultuous relationship with her now-husband, Sherlock Holmes and is looking forward to some time alone. However, fate intervenes, and their old friends, Ali Hazr and his brother, Mahmoud, now released from their disguise and known as Alistair and Marsh (characters from the previous book O Jerusalem). King blends the original Holmesian myth and a complex modern plot to create another delightful mystery "as intelligent as it is engagingly devious. " For an excerpt of the first chapter, go to Laurie R. King's website.
The Game
Justice Hall is the sixth book in the Mary Russell series by Laurie R. King . In this installment, Mary Russell has accepted her tumultuous relationship with her now-husband, Sherlock Holmes and is looking forward to some time alone. However, fate intervenes, and their old friends, Ali Hazr and his brother, Mahmoud, now released from their disguise and known as Alistair and Marsh (characters from the previous book O Jerusalem ). King blends the original Holmesian myth and a complex modern plot to create another delightful mystery "as intelligent as it is engagingly devious." [1]
For an excerpt of the first chapter, go to Laurie R. King's website. [2]
Reception
"Justice Hall opens on a deliciously dark and dreary night. Holmes and Russell have just returned to their snug seaside cottage after yet another hair-raising case, when a pounding at the door interrupts their fireside stupor. The frantic visitor is Ali [Hazr, from O Jerusalem]. Except that Ali turns out to have been masquerading all those years ago in the desert. (Washington Post)
From the opening knock on their door by a wounded visitor to the satisfying denouement, King has again crafted a sterling story." (Publishers Weekly) [3]
^ Justice Hall Book Summary , bookbrowse.com, retrieved November 03, 2009 
^ Justice Hall , laurierking.com, retrieved November 03, 2009 
^ Justice Hall , laurierking.com, retrieved November 03, 2009 
