I Am the Cheese is a crime novel by the American writer Robert Cormier, published in American and British hardcover and paperback editions all during 1977. In the U.S. Knopf published the hardcover under its Pantheon imprint and Dell the softcover under Laurel Leaf, its mass-market paperback imprint for teens. Its Library of Congress Subject Headings are intelligence service fiction and organized crime fiction.
Mr. Grey - agent in the Witness Protection Program
Arthur - a fat man in the town of Hookset who tells Adam of Junior Varney
Dr. Dupont - a kindly doctor in a mental hospital; Adam is his patient
Junior Varney - a troublemaker and thief in Hookset
Whipper - a bully in Carver
Title
This quote is a verse from " The Farmer In The Dell ", a song that Adam sings during the book:
The cheese stands alone
Heigh-ho, the merry-o
The cheese stands alone
He sings many of these songs throughout the novel. The song contains several characters, each taking someone with them when the farmer leaves, yet the cheese has nobody.
Adam believes that he is the cheese. He is alone in the world, his mother dead and his father is missing, and he lives in a hospital. He thinks that he is not wanted anymore. Also, as in other works by Cormier, there is a dual meaning to the title. The words "I am the cheese" may also represent Adam's feelings of entrapment: himself being the bait used to lure his parents into their murders.[ original research? ]
Another point was that his father had taught him the song, possibly in a way to reinforce the new name, 'Farmer', they had adopted.
Literary significance and criticism
The 1975 novel I Am the Cheese began Cormier's experimentation with first-person, present tense narration. When Cormier sent the manuscript to the publisher of his previous novel, The Chocolate War , he was confused and depressed, convinced that he was alienating his new young adult audience due to the complex and ambiguous story. However, I Am the Cheese proved to be a success.
Awards and nominations
I Am the Cheese was named to five annual book lists according to the publisher description of the 20th anniversary edition. [1] It won the 1997 Phoenix Award from the Children's Literature Association as the best English-language children's book that did not win a major award when it was originally published twenty years earlier. It is named for the mythical bird phoenix , which is reborn from its ashes, to suggest the book's rise from obscurity. [2]
