Madeleine's Ghost is a well-regarded first mystery novel by Robert Girardi.
Publishing history
An editor for Delacorte Press found the manuscript for Madeleine's Ghost on a friend's coffee table and fell in love with the story. [1]
Criticism
Kirkus Reviews, June 15, 1995:
Corrupted Creole civility complicates the life of a Brooklyn bohemian -- in a spirited debut deftly mingling past, present, and the vastly different worldviews of New Orleans and New York.
New York Times Book Review, 08/06/1995:
Quibbles: If you were almost fatally poisoned by oysters you shared with the person you loved most in the world, wouldn't you call that person and say, "How are you?" Ghosts and miracles I can accept. But do women in New York pick up strangers in bars for one-night stands, then leave them alone in the apartment with a note to let themselves out? I've never been sure what a beach book is, but there's a good chance 'Madeleine's Ghost' is one. It is so freshly observed that the sound of surf won't distract you. When you laugh out loud, nobody will complain. When the covers are closed, what's irritating about it disappears faster than sand between your toes. -- Patricia Volk [2]
Los Angeles Times Book Review, 08/06/1995:
'Madeleine's Ghost', Robert Girardi's debut novel, is...immensely engaging, lavish in its descriptive details, with a good, engrossing story to tell....it is in many ways a remarkable achievement...Immensely engaging, lavish in its descriptive details, with a good, engrossing story to tell. -- Joanna Scott
San Francisco Chronicle Book Review, 07/30/1995:
Furniture flies and ghosts walk, but these appartitions aren't the scariest part of 'Madeleine's Ghost', Robert Girardi's atmospheric, sweet-natured first novel about the miraculous power of love...this satisfying novel is filled with a rich cast of supporting characters... [3] -- Alix Madrigal
^ Washington Post, 7/17/95, p.B-5
^ Patricia Volk (August 6, 1995). "Brooklyn Needs a Saint" . The New York Times. 
^ Alix Madrigal (October 26, 1997). "Ghosts of Venice Speak to a Vapid Modern World" . San Francisco Chronicle. 
This article about a mystery novel is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
