The House of the Vestals is a collection of short stories by American author Steven Saylor, first published by St. Martin's Press in 1997. It is the sixth book in his Roma Sub Rosa series of mystery stories set in the Roman Empire. The main character is the Roman sleuth Gordianus the Finder.
Plot summary
This collection of short stories are set in the years between 80 BC and 72 BC , and tell the tales of how Gordianus first met his slave, and later wife, Bethesda; how he met his loyal manservant Belbo; of his friendship with his generous patron Lucius Claudius, as well as other tales. He also runs into important historical figures, such as Publius Clodius Pulcher and a young Caesar .
Death Wears A Mask
Gordianus and his adopted son, Eco, visit the theater and are drawn into a murder investigation.
The Tale of the Treasure House
While relaxing at home, Bethesda tells Gordianus the classic Egyptian folk tale of King Rhampsinitus and his treasure vault .
A Will Is A Way
Gordianus meets his future patron, Lucius Claudius, who wants him to investigate a puzzle involving a forged will.
An old soldier is haunted by visions of his victims during Sulla's Civil Wars .
Little Caesar and the Pirates
Gordianus is hired to deliver a ransom to pirates who have kidnapped a nobleman's young stepson, in a case which bears a suspicious similarity to the young Julius Caesar 's kidnapping. Along the way, Gordianus acquires his slave and loyal bodyguard, Belbo.
The Disappearance of the Saturnalia Silver
King Bee and Honey
Invited for a pleasant holiday at Lucius Claudius's country estate, Gordianus and his family are interrupted by the sudden death of another guest, whose wife suspects poisoning as the cause of death.
The Alexandrian Cat
While traveling as a young man in Alexandria , Gordianus must investigate the murder of a domestic cat, which are sacred animals in Egypt, before a riot erupts.
The House of the Vestals
In the titular story of the collection, Gordianus is called to the Temple of Vesta in the middle of the night, to see if there is any truth to the accusation that Lucius Sergius Catalina has had an affair with a Vestal Virgin .
