Rediscovery is a novel in the Darkover series of novels and short stories by Marion Zimmer Bradley and others published in the United States since 1958. The novel, first published by DAW Books in 1993, is co-written by Bradley and Mercedes Lackey and deals with Earth's reestablishment of contact with the lost human colony on the planet Darkover after centuries of societal development on the colony world.
Plot Summary
On Darkover, Lorill Hastur accompanies his twin, Leonie, to Dalereuth Tower for training. The keeper, Fiora, discovers that she has amazing but undisciplined laran powers.
A Terran ship heads towards Cottman’s Star, seeking possible descendants of pre-Empire lost colony ships of the distant past. After observing the weather patterns and geography of the planet from space, a shuttle attempts to land. It crashes in the mountains during a snowstorm and is rescued by men from Aldaran. At Aldaran Castle, they are greeted by Kermiac of Aldaran, who can speak to Elizabeth because she is a telepath. Elizabeth explains that they are an expedition from the stars looking for descendants of the Lost Ships.
Leonie Hastur perceives a threat coming to Darkover from one of the moons. She uses her laran to link to one of the minds on the Terran ship and listen to the crew conversations, though she does not understand all of what she hears. She reports to Keeper Fiora that strangers are lost in a storm near Aldaran. Leonie contacts her twin telepathically, and tells Lorill to go to Aldaran.
After several days, Elizabeth tells Commander MacAran that Darkover should be considered a closed world, since otherwise, Darkover will simply be plundered. The others disagree. With Kermiac’s approval, the Terrans begin building a spaceport at the city of Caer Donn.
Leonie is sent to Arilinn for more advanced training. She establishes a telepathic link with one of the Terrans, Ysaye Barnett, and they converse frequently. Ysaye introduces Leonie to Terran music.
Elizabeth and Ysaye are deliberately exposed to kireseth pollen by a Ryan Evans, a crew member who means them harm. Ysaye, with Leonie’s assistance, destroys Ryan Evans’ experiments with the kireseth flowers. Evans attacks her and Leonie responds, using Ysaye’s body. Evans is killed. Ysaye is severely injured and eventually dies.
Lorill Hastur reports to the Comyn Council his recommendation that they should have no contact with the Terrans.
Ysaye Barnett, computer specialist of African descent
Elizabeth MacKintosh, cultural anthropologist & telepath
David Lorne, cultural anthropologist, Elizabeth’s fiancee
Zeb Scott, pilot, future father of Marjorie Scott
Ryan Evans
Lorill Hastur, twin of Leonie
Leonie Hastur, twin of Lorill
Fiora, Keeper of Dalereuth
Kermiac of Aldaran, Lord of Aldaran
Felicia Darriell, Kermiac’s foster sister
Ramon Kadarin, paxman of Kermiac, a chieri-human hybrid
Thyra Darriell, future mother of Marguerida Alton
Inconsistencies with other books in the series
Rediscovery is notable for the timeline problems it creates with other books in the Darkover series. [4]
Kermiac Aldaran’s age: Kermiac is described in Rediscovery as appearing to be in his early fifties. Leonie Hastur is described as age 16. In The Forbidden Tower , which takes place about 40 years later, Valdir Alton is about age 11. [5] He must father Kennard Alton, who in turn fathers Lew Alton. Lew is about 30 when Kermiac dies as a result of the Sharra Matrix experiments. This makes Kermiac about 150 at his death.
Thyra Darriell’s age: Described as a newborn in this book, Thyra is described as a fairly young woman in The Sword of Aldones and Sharra's Exile . Based on the same calculations, Thyra would have been close to 100 at the time of the Sharra Matrix experiments.
Zeb Scott’s age: Zeb Scott, who is a minor character in this book, is a thirtyish Terran pilot. Later books describe him as the husband of Felicia Darriell and the father of at least two of her children – Rafe Scott and Marjorie Scott. Both are described as being about the same age as Lew Alton in The Sword of Aldones and Sharra's Exile . Even taking into account their chieri lineage, this would still suggest that Zeb fathered these children when he was close to 100 years old.
1993, USA, DAW 0-88677-561-2, pub. date Mar 1993, hardcover
1993, USA, SFBC #00997, pub. date June 1993, hardcover
1994, USA, DAW 0-88677-529-9, pub. date June 1994, paperback
