The Ice Storm is a 1994 American novel by Rick Moody. The novel was widely acclaimed by readers and critics alike, described as a funny, acerbic, and moving hymn to a dazed and confused era of American life. In 1997, the novel was adapted into an acclaimed feature film directed by Ang Lee, featuring a cast including Joan Allen, Kevin Kline, Sigourney Weaver, Christina Ricci, Elijah Wood and Tobey Maguire. The film also marked the screen debut of Katie Holmes as Libbets Casey.
Sandy Williams
Themes and analysis
The novel's central themes are the loss of innocence and moral compass in middle-upper class Americans, and the 1970s era. It also deals with several underlying themes, including the Watergate scandal and suburban secrets, such as sexual experimentation by youths, and the same thing being done by the adults who are failing to be role models for their children, as well as their absence from their children's lives, which causes the most significant problems in the novel. Set during the time of the sexual revolution , a central part of the novel is its recurring theme of sexuality. The rapidly changing sexual era is reflected in the lives of both families, who, as the revolution approached, have experimented with new, taboo sexual acts, such as incest and adultery . [1]
Critical reception
The Ice Storm was largely commended for its audacity and the many daring subjects explored in the novel.[ citation needed ] Critic Adam Begley of the Chicago Tribune called the novel: "A bitter and loving and damning tribute to the American family.... This is a good book, packed with keen observation and sympathy for human failure"[ citation needed ] while The Guardian called it "one of the wittiest books about family life ever written."[ citation needed ] Amanda Heller of The Boston Globe stated "Moody brings this profusion of metaphor to order with a fierce, subversive intelligence. His characters, drawn with a manic acuity that isn't fully accounted for until the end, stay with us long after we've finished reading."[ citation needed ]
The novel was a moderate success commercially; however its sales were boosted in 1997 with the release of the film adaptation.[ citation needed ]
Film adaptation
The film adaptation The Ice Storm featured a cast including Sigourney Weaver , Kevin Kline , Joan Allen , Christina Ricci , Tobey Maguire and Elijah Wood . The film was a succès d'estime as an art house film and critically acclaimed despite a poor box office, however it gained a modest reception on subsequent home video releases.[ citation needed ] While remaining more or less faithful to the book, some details were changed. Most notably, Weaver and Jamey Sheridan 's characters were named Janey and Jim Carver, while in Moody's book, their surname was Williams.
