Walk Two Moons is a novel written by Sharon Creech, published by Scholastic in 1994 and winner of the 1995 Newbery Medal. The novel was originally intended as a follow-up to Creech's previous novel Absolutely Normal Chaos; however, the idea was changed after Creech began writing.
Plot
The novel is narrated by Salamanca Hiddle. Sal's mother has recently left Sal's father, and Sal's grandparents are taking her on a cross-country car trip to Lewiston, Idaho to see her mother. Sal loves nature and was very close to her mother before she left. On the trip, Sal entertains her grandparents by telling a story about her friend in Euclid, Ohio , Phoebe Winterbottom, whose mother suddenly disappeared and left their family too, and about Ben Finney with whom Sal begins a tight relationship. Over the course of the book, as Sal's story unfolds and their car travels west, as she reveals more details about Phoebe's story, and why her story reminds Salamanca of her own.
Themes
The major themes in the story include grief, love, death, [3] cultural identity, [4] women's roles as mothers and wives, [5] coming to terms with the loss of a loved one, and the development of new relationships. The process of describing Phoebe's story and the reasons that her mother left helps Sal better understand her own mother's journey. [6]
Creech drew on her own background for many of the book's themes and images, including Sal's love of nature, her relationship with her mother, and the road trip to Idaho that frames the narrative. [6] In an interview, Creech said that she found the aphorism that gives the book its title ("Don't judge a man until you've walked two moons in his moccasins") in a fortune cookie . [2] [7]
Awards
In 1995Walk Two Moons won the Newbery Medal , the United Kingdom Reading Association Award, and the United Kingdom's Children's Book Award . In 1996, it received the WH Smith Mind-Boggling Book Award . In 1997, it also won the Literaturhaus Award, Austria, and the Young Adult Sequoyah Award , Oklahoma, USA . [2]
