King Arthur and His Knights of the Round Table is a children's novel written by Roger Lancelyn Green. It was first published in Puffin Books in 1953 and has been frequently reprinted. In 2008, it was re-issued in the Puffin Classics series. This edition has an inspiring introduction by David Almond, and the original illustrations by Lotte Reiniger. The book's originality lies in its attempt to weave together the many legends surrounding King Arthur. Green claimed that Thomas Malory's version of the story, Le Morte d'Arthur, was a loose collection of separate stories. Green attempted to relate each legend so that the entire story would have a beginning, middle, and end. Green used many resources other than Thomas Malory when gathering the legends together.
ISBN 9780141918709
King Arthur and His Knights of the Round Table is a children's novel written by Roger Lancelyn Green . It was first published by Puffin Books in 1953 and has been frequently reprinted. [1] In 2008, it was re-issued in the Puffin Classics series. This edition has an inspiring introduction by David Almond (the award-winning author of Clay , Skellig , Kit's Wilderness and The Fire-Eaters ), [2] and the original illustrations by Lotte Reiniger . The book's originality lies in its attempt to weave together the many legends surrounding King Arthur . Green claimed that Thomas Malory 's version of the story, Le Morte d'Arthur , was a loose collection of separate stories. Green attempted to relate each legend so that the entire story would have a beginning, middle, and end. Green used many resources other than Thomas Malory when gathering the legends together.
Summary
After Uther Pendragon ’s death, Merlin the magician forms a stone, and in it, a sword . On this sword, it is written that anyone who can pull it out of the stone will become the new King of England. After many years, the young Arthur , (secretly the son of Pendragon), pulls this magical sword out of the stone, and becomes king. Together with Merlin, he constructs a round table , where only the best knights of England may sit. [3]
More and more knights come to join the brotherhood of the Round Table, and each has his own adventures. [3]
After many years, The holy knight Sir Galahad , the son of Sir Lancelot , comes to the court of Arthur. With his coming, all knights ride throughout Europe for the search of the Holy Grail of Jesus Christ . Only four knights see the Grail: Sir Lancelot, Sir Percival , Sir Bors de Gaunnes and Sir Galahad. [3]
After the Grail is found, the last battle of the Round Table is close-at-hand. In this battle, many knights die and with them, King Arthur, his nephew Sir Gawain , and also, Mordred , the wicked son of King Arthur and his half-sister Morgana le Fay . [3]
King Arthur is buried at Avalon , the secret island of the druids and damsels. [3]
