Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day, published in 1972, is an ALA Notable Children's Book written by Judith Viorst and illustrated by Ray Cruz. It has also won a George G. Stone Center Recognition of Merit, a Georgia Children's Book Award, and is a Reading Rainbow book. Viorst followed this book up with a sequel, Alexander and the Wonderful, Marvelous, Excellent, Terrific Ninety Days.
Plot
From the moment Alexander wakes up things just don't go Alexander's way. As he gets up, the gum that was in his mouth the night before winds up in his hair. When he gets out of bed, he trips on the skateboard and drops his sweater into the sink while the water was running. At breakfast, Alexander's brothers, Anthony and Nick reach into their cereal boxes and find amazing prizes, while Alexander ends up with just cereal.
On the way to school, he doesn't get the window seat in the carpool. At school, [1] his teacher, Mrs. Dickens, doesn't like his picture of the invisible castle (which is actually just a blank sheet of paper), criticizes him for singing too loud, and leaving out 16 when he counts. His friend, Paul, deserts him for his third best friend and there is no dessert in his lunchbag. At the dentist, Dr. Fields tells Alexander he has a cavity, the elevator door closes on his foot, Anthony pushes him in the mud, Nick says he is a crybaby for crying, and Mom punishes him in the act of punching Nick.
At the shoe store, they're sold out of Alexander's choice of sneakers (blue ones with red stripes), so Mom has to buy him plain white sneakers, which he refuses to wear. At Dad's office, Alexander makes a mess of things when he fools around with everything there (the copying machine, the books, and the telephone) getting to the point where Dad tells him not to pick him up from work anymore.
At home, the family has lima beans for dinner (which he hates), there is kissing on TV (which he also hates), bathtime becomes a nightmare (too much hot water, soap in his eyes, and losing a marble down the drain) and he has to wear his railroad train pajamas (he hates his railroad train pajamas). At bedtime, his nightlight burns out, he bites his tongue, Nick takes back a pillow, and the family cat chooses to sleep with Anthony. Throughout the book, Alexander mentions that he wants to move to Australia. [1] The book ends with Mom's assurance that everybody has bad days, even people who live in Australia. In the Australian and New Zealand versions he wants to move to Timbuktu , not Australia.
TV adaption
On January 13, 1990, the book was adapted into a 30 minute animated musical television special that aired on HBO in the United States.
While the special remained true to the book, there were some differences from the original book.
1. Aside from the running gag of Alexander making references to Australia, the producers added another running gag in the special: Alexander searches for his favorite yo-yo; a purple glow in the dark one everywhere.
2. Dad has no mustache like he did in the book.
3. Eight bad things for Alexander were added to the special:
Alexander opens a drawer too far, making it land on his foot.
Alexander spills breakfast cereal on the floor while searching for the free prize.
Alexander's friends refuse to let him play Monkey in the Middle with them.
Alexander sings "roll" and "merlily" in the " Row, Row, Row Your Boat " song.
Alexander's friends tease him multiple times when he explains why he can't come play ball.
Alexander fools around with the toothpaste, dentist chair, and tray during his dental appointment, causing the dentist to make him sit still for several seconds.
The shoeman turns down Alexander's alternate choice of sneakers (green ones).
Dad unfairly punishes Alexander for playing with the copying machine and knocking the books off his desk by making him sit on the couch for a timeout , when he didn't even do those things on purpose.
4. Three good things were also added to the special to show the audience that even a bad day can have some good in it:
Anthony and Nick make up for what they did to Alexander while waiting for Mom to pick up the car.
Mom finds Alexander's favorite yo-yo in the closet while turning off the closet light.
Before the special closes to the credits, Timothy (the cat) changes his mind and sleeps with Alexander while Alexander talks about how Mom says everybody has bad days, even in Australia.
5. Although mentioned, the following bad things are not shown in the special.
The family eats lima beans for dinner.
Alexander watches kissing on television.
Alexander's bath makes the evening worse for him.
6. The special also included three original songs:
"So much to do, so little time in the morning"
"If I could be the only child"
"I've had a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day"
Theater
In 1998, Viorst and the Kennedy Center joined together to turn the book into a musical production. [1] [3] Charles Strouse wrote the music, Viorst wrote the script and lyrics, and the musical score was composed by Shelly Markham. [3] The productions have been performed around the country. [1] [4]
Other characters in the play are Audrey, Becky and many others.
In 2004, a stage adaptation was run at the B Street Theatre .
Main article: Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day (film)
In 2011, it was reported that 20th Century Fox had plans to make a live action film adaptation of the book. [5] Written by Lisa Cholodenko and Rob Lieber, the film was set to be directed by Cholodenko, and produced by Shawn Levy with Dan Levine for Levy's 21 Laps, and Lisa Henson with Jason Lust for The Jim Henson Company . [5] Steve Carell has joined in April 2012, to star as Ben, Alexander's dad. [6] In October 2012, Walt Disney Pictures picked up the project, [7] reportedly due to Fox being "uncomfortable with the budget." [8] In February 2013, Deadline reported that Cholodenko has left the project, [9] and a month later, that Miguel Arteta was in talks with Disney to replace Cholodenko. [10] In April 2013, Jennifer Garner was in talks to play Alexander's mom. [11] In June 2013, The Walt Disney Studios set the release date for October 10, 2014, and confirmed that Carell and Garner will play Alexander's parents. [12] The same month, Disney cast Ed Oxenbould as Alexander. [13] Bella Thorne will play Alexander's older brother's girlfriend. [14]
Characters
Alexander and his two older brothers, Anthony and Nick, are based on Viorst's own three sons of the same names. [15]
Cultural references
The phrase "terrible, horrible, no good, very bad . . ." has become an Internet meme , often used by bloggers, and sometimes by mainstream media, to criticize, or characterize setbacks for, an individual or political movement. [16] [17] [18]
