The Mysterious Affair at Styles is a detective novel by Agatha Christie. It was written in 1916 and was first published by John Lane in the United States in October 1920 and in the United Kingdom by The Bodley Head (John Lane's UK company) on 21 January 1921. The U.S. edition retailed at US$2.00 and the UK edition at seven shillings and sixpence (7/6). Styles was Christie's first published novel, introducing Hercule Poirot, Inspector (later, Chief Inspector) Japp, and Arthur Hastings (Lieutenant and later, Captain). Poirot is described as "a dear little man", "an extraordinary looking little man" and a "quaint dandyfied little man". The story is told in first person by Hastings and features many of the elements that have become icons of the Golden Age of Detective Fiction, largely due to Christie's influence. It is set in a large, isolated country manor. There are a half-dozen suspects, most of whom are hiding facts about themselves. The book includes maps of the house, the murder scene, and a drawing of a fragment of a will, as well as a number of red herrings and surprise plot twists. Christie dedicated this first book of her career "to my mother"--Clara Boehmer--with whom she had developed a very close relationship with especially after the death of her father, Frederick Miller, in 1901.
Plot summary
Hastings comes to Styles Court, home of his long-time friends, while recovering from a war wound. He meets his old friend Poirot, now residing in the village Styles St. Mary, with other Belgian refugees, next to Styles Court. His visit begins pleasantly, as he absorbs the changes to his friends since he last saw them.
Emily Cavendish, stepmother to John and Lawrence, inherited her husband's fortune, as well as the family estate in Styles Court, a country manor located in Essex. Mrs. Cavendish became Mrs. Inglethorp upon her recent remarriage to a younger man, Alfred Inglethorp. John's wife Mary and Cynthia Murdoch also live at Styles. The elder son John will inherit Styles upon his stepmother's decease. Hastings and Lawrence Cavendish visit the hospital where Cynthia Murdoch, a protégé of Mrs. Inglethorp, shows them the pharmacy where she works and its poison cabinet.
The residents of Styles are awakened by Emily Inglethorp's strangled cries: she is dying painfully from an obvious case of strychnine poisoning. A maid is sent to get Doctor Wilkins. Dr. Bauerstein is driving past the house when the maid runs out. Amidst Emily's last cries, Dr. Bauerstein attempts to save her, unsuccessfully. Alfred is not to be found. Hastings enlists the help of his friend Hercule Poirot.
Poirot finds at the scene of the crime: all doors to the victim's room were bolted from the inside; a cup of cocoa and rum; green threads caught in a latch; candle wax spilled on the floor; remnants of a will burned in the fireplace; a locked box; and a note on Mr. Inglethorp's desk (handwritten several times checking the spelling of 'I am possessed'). Poirot interviews those present. On the day she was killed, Emily Inglethorp was overheard arguing with someone, either her husband Alfred, or her stepson John. Afterwards, she seemed quite distressed and, apparently, made a new will, witnessed by Mr. Gardener, which no one can find. She ate little at dinner and retired early to her room with her document case and a cup of cocoa. Someone later forced open that case and a document was removed. Alfred Inglethorp left Styles earlier in the evening and stayed overnight in the nearby village, so was not present when the poisoning occurred. Nobody can explain how or when the strychnine was administered to Mrs. Inglethorp. Poirot notes that it was 80 degrees on the day of her murder; also, that Alfred Inglethorp wore peculiar clothes, had a black beard, and used glasses, giving him an appearance easy to imitate.
Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard focuses on Alfred as the prime suspect. Dr. Bauerstein, a toxicologist, also draws Japp's attention. Evelyn Howard, Emily's companion, seems to hate Alfred most of all. Alfred's behaviour is suspicious. The inquest declares death by strychnine. The source has not yet been found; no traces were present in the 8 pm coffee or the cocoa. Mary Cavendish says that she heard something heavy fall at 4:30 am: probably the table. She overheard the quarrel but will not admit to having understood it. The local chemist sold strychnine to Mr. Inglethorp on the day before the murder. Alfred denies buying the drug, cannot remember where he was at that time, and denies killing his wife. The verdict is murder by a person unknown.
Before Japp can arrest Alfred, Poirot prevails on him to discuss the case at Styles. Poirot absolves Alfred by confirming the latter's alibi for Monday night: he was walking with Mrs. Raikes, so someone else bought the strychnine. Poirot says he lacks the last link in the evidence. Japp and Poirot continue to explore. Japp arrests John Cavendish, because of his inheritance, together with evidence to suggest he had obtained poison. Japp arrests Dr. Bauerstein for war-related espionage. The servant Dorcas finds the receipt for a wig, bought by Lawrence Cavendish, John's younger brother. She tells them about Mrs. Inglethorp's call bell being broken on Monday, and repaired on Tuesday morning. Mary Cavendish tells Hastings she will leave John and Styles, because she is unhappy. Hastings proposes marriage to Cynthia and is turned down. Poirot finds Lawrence's finger marks on a vial of strychnine at the hospital. Poirot takes something Hastings says as a clue, and so finds the final link.
Poirot brings everyone together for the denouement. Poirot clears John Cavendish by proving it was Alfred Inglethorp who committed the crime, assisted by Evelyn Howard. She is his close cousin, not his enemy. Evelyn disguised herself to look like Alfred when purchasing the garden strychnine, one bit of false evidence. Poirot became suspicious when he realised that Alfred wanted to be arrested. They poisoned Emily by adding bromide to her regular evening medicine; this caused its normally innocuous strychnine constituents to sink to the bottom of the bottle so that she eventually consumed them all in a single, lethal dose. Their plan had been for Alfred Inglethorp to incriminate himself with false evidence, which could then be refuted at his trial. Under the principle of double jeopardy, he could not be tried for the crime a second time. But Japp did not arrest Inglethorp on the false evidence, so the prosecution will now succeed. Mary and John are reconciled, and peace returns to Styles Court.
Arthur Hastings , the narrator, on sick leave from the Western Front
Hercule Poirot , a famous Belgian detective displaced by the war to England; Hastings' old friend; "a dear little man", "an extraordinary looking little man" and a "quaint dandyfied little man". [4]
Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard
Emily Inglethorp, mistress of Styles, a wealthy old woman
Alfred Inglethorp, her much younger new husband, thought to be a spoiled fortune-hunter
John Cavendish, her elder stepson and remainderman to Styles
Mary Cavendish, John's wife
Lawrence Cavendish, John's younger brother
Evelyn Howard, Mrs. Inglethorp's companion
Cynthia Murdoch, the beautiful, orphaned daughter of a friend of the family
Dr Bauerstein, a suspicious toxicologist
Dorcas, a maid at Styles
Dedication
The book's dedication reads: "To my Mother". Christie's mother, Clarissa ("Clara") Boehmer Miller (1854–1926), was a strong influence on her life and someone to whom Christie was extremely close, especially after the death of her father in 1901. It was while Christie was ill (circa 1908) that her mother suggested she write a story. The result was The House of Beauty, now a lost work but one which hesitantly started her writing career. [5] Christie later revised this story as The House of Dreams, and it was published in issue 74 of The Sovereign Magazine in January 1926 and, many years later, in 1997, in book form in While the Light Lasts and Other Stories . Christie also dedicated her debut novel as Mary Westmacott, Giant's Bread (1930), to her mother who, by that time, had died.
Literary significance and reception
The Times Literary Supplement (3 February 1921) gave the book an enthusiastic, if short, review, which stated: "The only fault this story has is that it is almost too ingenious." It went on to describe the basic set-up of the plot and concluded: "It is said to be the author's first book, and the result of a bet about the possibility of writing a detective story in which the reader would not be able to spot the criminal. Every reader must admit that the bet was won." [6]
The New York Times Book Review (26 December 1920), [7] was also impressed:
Though this may be the first published book of Miss Agatha Christie, she betrays the cunning of an old hand ... You must wait for the last-but-one chapter in the book for the last link in the chain of evidence that enabled Mr. Poirot to unravel the whole complicated plot and lay the guilt where it really belonged. And you may safely make a wager with yourself that until you have heard M. Poirot's final word on the mysterious affair at Styles, you will be kept guessing at its solution and will most certainly never lay down this most entertaining book.
The novel's review in The Sunday Times of 20 February, 1921, quoted the publisher's promotional blurb concerning Christie writing the book as the result of a bet that she would not be able to do so without the reader being able to guess the murderer, then said, "Personally we did not find the "spotting" so very difficult, but we are free to admit that the story is, especially for a first adventure in fiction, very well contrived, and that the solution of the mystery is the result of logical deduction. The story, moreover, has no lack of movement, and the several characters are well drawn." [8]
The contributor who wrote his column under the pseudonym of "A Man of Kent" in the 10 February 1921 issue of the Christian newspaper The British Weekly praised the novel but was overly generous in giving away the identity of the murderers. To wit,
It will rejoice the heart of all who truly relish detective stories, from Mr. McKenna[ who? ] downwards. I have heard that this is Miss Christie's first book, and that she wrote it in response to a challenge. If so, the feat was amazing, for the book is put together so deftly that I can remember no recent book of the kind, which approaches it in merit. It is well written, well proportioned, and full of surprises. When does the reader first suspect the murderer? For my part, I made up my mind from the beginning that the middle-aged husband of the old lady was in every way qualified to murder her, and I refused to surrender this conviction when suspicion of him is scattered for a moment. But I was not in the least degree prepared to find that his accomplice was the woman who pretended to be a friend. I ought to say, however, that an expert in detective stories with whom I discussed it, said he was convinced from the beginning that the true culprit was the woman whom the victim in her lifetime believed to be her staunchest friend. I hope I have not revealed too much of the plot. Lovers of good detective stories will, without exception, rejoice in this book. [9]
The Bodley Head quoted excerpts from this review in future books by Christie but, understandably, did not use those passages which gave away the identity of the culprits.
"Introducing Hercule Poirot, the brilliant – and eccentric – detective who, at a friend's request, steps out of retirement – and into the shadows of a classic mystery on the outskirts of Essex. The victim is the wealthy mistress of Styles Court, found in her locked bedroom with the name of her late husband on her dying lips. Poirot has a few questions for her fortune-hunting new spouse, her aimless stepsons, her private doctor, and her hired companion. The answers are positively poisonous. Who's responsible, and why, can only be revealed by the master detective himself." (Book jacket, Berkley Book edition April 1984)
In his book, A Talent to Deceive – An Appreciation of Agatha Christie, writer/critic Robert Barnard wrote:
Christie's debut novel , from which she made £25 and John Lane made goodness knows how much. The Big House in wartime, with privations, war work and rumours of spies. Her hand was over-liberal with clues and red herrings, but it was a highly cunning hand, even at this stage [10]
In general The Mysterious Affair at Styles is a considerable achievement for a first-off author. The country-house-party murder is a stereotype in the detective-story genre, which Christie makes no great use of. Not her sort of occasion, at least later in life, and perhaps not really her class. The family party is much more in her line, and this is what we have here. This is one of the few Christies anchored in time and space: we are in Essex, during the First World War. The family is kept together under one roof by the exigencies of war and of a matriarch demanding rather than tyrannical – not one of her later splendid monsters, but a sympathetic and lightly shaded characterisation. If the lifestyle of the family still seems to us lavish, even wasteful, nevertheless we have the half sense that we are witnessing the beginning of the end of the Edwardian summer, that the era of country-house living has entered its final phase. Christie takes advantage of this end-of-an-era feeling in several ways: while she uses the full range of servants and their testimony, a sense of decline, of break-up is evident; feudal attitudes exist, but they crack easily. The marriage of the matriarch with a mysterious nobody is the central out-of-joint event in an intricate web of subtle changes. The family is lightly but effectively characterised, and on the outskirts of the story are the villagers, the small businessmen, and the surrounding farmers – the nucleus of Mayhem Parva. It is, too, a very clever story, with clues and red herrings falling thick and fast. We are entering the age when plans of the house were an indispensable aid to the aspirant solver of detective stories, and when cleverness was more important than suspense. But here we come to a problem that Agatha Christie has not yet solved, for cleverness over the long length easily becomes exhausting, and too many clues tend to cancel each other out, as far as reader interest is concerned. These were problems which Conan Doyle never satisfactorily overcame, but which Christie would.". [11]
Golden Age of Detective Fiction
The story is told in the first person by Hastings, and features many of the elements that have become icons of the Golden Age of Detective Fiction , largely due to Christie's influence. It is set in a large, isolated country manor. There are a half-dozen suspects, most of whom are hiding facts about themselves. The plot includes a number of red herrings and surprise twists.[ citation needed ]
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
Television
The Mysterious Affair at Styles was adapted as a 103-minute drama and transmitted on ITV in the UK on Sunday, 16 September, 1990, as a special episode in their series Agatha Christie's Poirot to celebrate the centenary of the author's birth. [12]
The adaptation was generally faithful to the novel, although Dr Bauerstein and some minor characters were left out. Adaptor: Clive Exton
