Lost in the Funhouse (1968) is a short story collection by American author John Barth. The postmodern stories are extremely self-conscious and self-reflexive and are considered to exemplify metafiction. Though Barth's reputation rests mainly on his long novels, the stories "Night-Sea Journey", "Lost in the Funhouse", "Title" and "Life-Story" from Lost in the Funhouse are widely anthologized. The book appeared the year after the publication of Barth's essay The Literature of Exhaustion, in which Barth said that the traditional modes of realistic fiction had been used up, but that this exhaustion itself could be used to inspire a new generation of writers, citing Nabokov, Beckett, and especially Borges as exemplars of this new approach. Lost in the Funhouse took these ideas to an extreme, for which it was both praised and condemned by critics.
Publication history
Written between 1966 and 1968, [9] several of the stories had already been published separately. [10]
Barth has said he has written his books in pairs: the realistic, existential novels, The Floating Opera and The End of the Road , were followed by the long, mythical novels, The Sot-Weed Factor and Giles Goat-Boy . Lost in the Funhouse came out in 1968, and was followed in 1972 by Chimera , a collection of three self-aware, interrelated, metafictional novellas . [11]
This section requires expansion .
(February 2013)
Lost in the Funhouse opens with a "story" which can be cut and pasted to form an endless Möbius strip
The first-person protagonist of "Night-Sea Journey" is a spermatozoon
The book opens with "Frame-Tale"—a "story" in which "ONCE UPON A TIME THERE" and "WAS A STORY THAT BEGAN" are printed vertically, one on each side of the page. This is intended to be cut out by the reader, and its ends being fastened together, after being twisted once in a Möbius strip . This results in a regressus ad infinitum , a loop with no beginning or end. [12] "Night-Sea Journey" follows, the first-person story of a human spermatozoon on its way to fertilized an egg. The tale allegorically recapitulates the story of human life in condensed form. [5]
In "Petition", one half of a pair of Siamese twins , joined at the stomach to his brother's back, writes a petition in 1931 to Prajadhipok , King of Siam (now Thailand ), protesting his brother's not acknowledging his existence. [13]
Menelaus anguishes over why Helen would choose him in the extremely metaleptic "Menalaiad"
In "Menalaiad", Barth leads the reader in and out of seven metaleptic layers. [14] Menalaus ' despairs as his story progresses through layer after layer of quotation marks, as one story is framed by another and then another. [15]
"Autobiography", which is "meant for monophonic tape and visible but silent author",... [14]
Three of the stories--"Ambrose, His Mark"; "Water-Message"; and the title story, "Lost in the Funhouse"--all concern a young boy named Ambrose and members of his family. The first story is told in first person, leading up to describing how Ambrose received his name. The second is told in third-person, written in a deliberately archaic style. The third is the most metafictional of the three, with a narrator commenting on the story's form and literary devices as it progresses.
"Life-Story" is another metafictional commentary on its own telling. In what is apparently an argument between a couple with problems in their relationship, Barth rejects giving details of names and descriptions, instead just using the words "fill in the blank."
In keeping with the book's subtitle--"Fiction for Print, Tape, Live Voice"--the "Author's Note" by Barth indicates the various media through which a number of these stories can be conveyed. In particular, he notes that recorded and/or live voice can be used to convey "Night-Sea Journey," "Glossolalia," "Echo," "Autobiography," and "Title."
List of stories
