O Pioneers! is a 1913 novel by American author Willa Cather. It was her first novel of her Great Plains trilogy, and written after she was living and working in New York.
Plot introduction
O Pioneers! tells the story of the Bergsons, a family of Swedish immigrants in the farm country near the fictional town of Hanover, Nebraska , at the turn of the 20th century. The main character, Alexandra Bergson, inherits the family farmland when her father dies and devotes her life to making the farm a viable enterprise at a time when many other immigrant families are giving up and leaving the prairie . The novel is also concerned with two romantic relationships, one between Alexandra and family friend Carl Linstrum and the other between Alexandra's brother Emil and the married Marie Shabata.
The book is divided into five parts, each of which has numerous chapters.
Part I – The Wild Land
On a windy day in Hanover, Nebraska, Alexandra Bergson is with her five-year-old brother Emil, whose little kitten has climbed a telegraph pole and is afraid to come down. Alexandra finds her neighbor and friend Carl Linstrum, who retrieves the kitten. Later, Alexandra finds Emil in the general store with Marie Tovesky, who is two years older than Emil. Marie's father has brought her from Omaha .
Alexandra's father is dying, and he wishes that she run the farm after he is gone. Alexandra and her brothers Oscar and Lou later visit Crazy Ivar, who advises them to keep their hogs clean. When the Linstrums are leaving, Oscar and Lou want to leave too, but neither their mother nor Alexandra will. After visiting villages downwards to see how they are getting on, Alexandra talks her brothers Oscar and Lou into mortgaging the farm to buy more land, in hopes of ending up as rich landowners.
Part II – Neighboring Fields
Sixteen years later, the farms are now prosperous. Alexandra and her brothers have divided up their inheritance, and Emil has just returned from college. The Linstrum farm has failed, and Marie, now married to Frank Shabata, has bought it. That same day, the Bergsons are surprised by a visit from Carl Linstrum, whom they have not seen for thirteen years. [1] [Note: Carl says it has been sixteen years, but this is a textual error. John Bergson died sixteen years earlier, and Carl's family left during the drought that occurred three years later.] Having failed at a job in Chicago , he is on his way to Alaska , but decides to stay with Alexandra for a while. Carl notices the growing flirtatious relationship between Emil and Marie. Lou and Oscar suspect that Carl wants to marry Alexandra, and are resentful at the idea that Carl might try to marry into a farm, while they had to work hard for theirs. This causes problems between Alexandra and her brothers, and they stop speaking to each other. Carl, recognizing a problem, decides to leave for Alaska. At the same time, Emil announces he is leaving for a job in Mexico City . Alexandra is left alone.
Part III – Winter Memories
Alexandra spends the winter alone, except for occasional visits from Marie, whom she visits with Mrs. Lee. She also has an increased number of the mysterious dreams she has had since girlhood.
Part IV – The White Mulberry Tree
Emil returns from Mexico City. His best friend, Amédée, is now married with a young son. At a fair at the French church, Emil and Marie kiss for the first time. They later confess their illicit love, and Emil determines to leave for law school in Michigan . Before he leaves, Amédée dies from a ruptured appendix, and as a result both Emil and Marie realize what they value most. Before leaving for Michigan, Emil stops by Marie's farm to say one last goodbye, and they fall into a passionate embrace beneath the white mulberry tree. They stay there for several hours, until Marie's husband, Frank, finds them and shoots them in a drunken rage. He flees to Omaha , where he later turns himself in for the crime. Ivar discovers Emil's abandoned horse, leading him to search for the boy and discover the bodies.
Part V – Alexandra
After Emil's death Alexandra is distraught, in shock, and slightly out of it. She goes off in a rainstorm. Ivar goes looking for her and brings her back home, where she sleeps fitfully and dreams about death. She then decides to visit Frank in Lincoln where he is incarcerated. While in town she walks by Emil's university campus, comes upon a polite young man, and feels better. The next day she talks to Frank in prison. He is bedraggled and can barely speak properly, and she promises to do what she can to see him released; she bears no ill will toward him. She then receives a telegram from Carl, telling her that he is back. They decide to marry, unconcerned with her brothers' approval.
Characters
Alexandra Bergson: the main character of the book. A strong-willed and intelligent woman. She was given the farm by her father John Bergson and over the next 16 years makes it very prosperous. Alexandra is not good at sensing the feelings of other people or herself – it takes her a long time to realize that she loves Carl Linstrum. She also misses Emil's growing attraction toward the unhappily married Marie Shabata. She also seems to forgive easily, as she claims to have no ill will against Frank, despite the fact he savagely murdered her brother. She is about 40 years old in the second part of the book.
Emil Bergson: the youngest child of John Bergson. He grows up in Alexandra's wealth to become an intelligent, handsome, and athletic person, and takes the opportunity to go to college. Tragically, he is in love with the unhappily married Marie Shabata. He leaves for Mexico to try to escape his temptation for Marie, but after a year he cannot resist and returns. Before leaving for law school he bids a final goodbye to Marie, kissing her for the first time, but Frank Shabata, Marie's husband, drunkenly catches them in the act and shoots them both. He is mentally tormented by the crime and is jailed after turning himself in.
Crazy Ivar: lives in a remote plot of land in Nebraska that is difficult to get to, so nobody visits him. He is reported to be crazy, and makes hammocks. He also reads the Bible and has a mystic quality about him. He also has a great affinity to animals, especially birds.
Carl: Alexandra's lover and longtime best friend.
Signa: the youngest of Alexandra's Swedish servants, her favorite.
Barney Flinn: Alexandra's foreman.
Nelse Jensen: Signa's suitor, then husband.
Annie Lee: Lou's wife's maiden name.
Mrs. Lee: Lou's mother-in-law.
Milly: Annie's 15-year-old daughter. She plays the organ and the piano (which Alexandra bought for her).
Stella: Annie's younger daughter.
Marie Tovesky Shabata: Emil's unrequited love interest. A charming female neighbor who has known the Bergsons since childhood and is characterized as being simultaneously aloof and warm towards everyone without prejudice or favor, which infuriates her husband Frank, as well as Emil, who harbors romantic feelings for her despite her marriage to Frank.
Frank Shabata: Marie's husband. He likes to read about rich people's bold gestures in the Sunday newspaper. His character is a representation of anger and irrationality on the prairie. He kills his wife Marie and Emil in a drunken rage, and is sent to prison in Lincoln, Nebraska. He regrets doing what he did and he looks destroyed when Alexandra goes to visit him.
Albert Tovesky: Marie's father; an adviser in Omaha .
Amédée Chevalier: a Frenchman, friends with Emil. He dies from a ruptured appendix.
Angélique Chevalier: Amédée's wife.
Father Duchesne: the French priest.
Raoul Marcel: a good friend to Emil
Moses Marcel: Raoul's father.
