The Five People You Meet in Heaven is a best-selling novel by Mitch Albom. It follows the life and death of a maintenance man named Eddie. In a heroic attempt to save a little girl from a falling amusement park ride, Eddie is killed and sent to heaven, where he encounters five people who significantly impacted him while he was alive. The Five People You Meet in Heaven was published in 2003 by Hyperion and remained on the New York Times Best Seller list for 95 weeks.
Storyline
The story starts with an elderly man named Eddie who works as the head of maintenance at an amusement park called Ruby Pier. Eddie is a face known to regulars at the pier and is sometimes jokingly referred to as "Eddie Maintenance" due to the positioning of the patches on his work uniform. Eddie is able to perform his job (a job he inherited from his father despite discontentment with life at the pier) despite a crippling leg injury he received as a soldier during World War II . Supposedly, rumors had been spread that Eddie had gotten into an altercation with a man in his platoon during the war - and "nobody knew what happened to the other guy. Nobody asked." This turns out to be foreshadowing to the time and place of the Captain's death, and foreshadowing to his Captain being the cause of his leg injury during the war.
On Eddie's birthday, one of the amusement park rides malfunctions because of a damaged cable and stops halfway through the ride. Two of the staff at Ruby Pier are able to rescue the passengers on the ride and then release the ride's cart for inspection- completely oblivious to Eddie's screams as he realized the cart will detach if it is dropped. As he realizes this, he notices a girl he'd seen before at the park (Amy/Annie) standing helplessly in the exact spot the cart was set to impact. Eddie throws himself with all his might towards the girl, intending to pull her to safety. Eddie feels an exploding impact, sees a blinding flash, feels a little girl's hands in his own, and then nothingness.
Eddie then finds himself awake and uninjured and realizes that he feels young and much more energetic. He meets a man known simply as "the Blue Man" who had worked at Ruby Pier's freak show (while it was still open, during the days of Eddie's childhood) and whose real name is Joseph Corvelzchik. Through their conversation, Eddie finds out that he is dead, has gone to Heaven and has embarked on a journey through five levels of Heaven, at each step meeting another person who has significantly impacted his life, or he had done so to theirs. He also finds the reason for his sudden energy, youth, and stamina - in the five stages of Heaven, you will feel exactly the same way you did (young, old, healthy, sick, strong, weak) as you did when you knew the person you are meeting. Eddie asks why Joseph, whom he does not know, is his first person, and Joseph informs Eddie that he died when Eddie and his brother threw a baseball which hit another driver and caused a car accident. From this, Eddie learns his first lesson which is that there are no random events in life and all individuals and experiences are connected in some way.
The second person that Eddie meets is his former captain from the army, whom Eddie finds sitting in a tree in a Philippine rainforest . The Captain reminds Eddie of their time together as prisoners of war in a forced labor camp . Their group escaped after a lengthy period of time and burned the camp during their escape as an act of relieving some of the stress placed upon them during their long stretch in captivity. Eddie remembers that he had seen a shadow running from one of the huts that he set aflame, although he never identified the figure. The Captain confesses that he was the one who shot Eddie in the leg to prevent Eddie from chasing the shadow into the fire, which would have certainly caused Eddie's death. This saved Eddie's life while leaving him with the lifelong injury that Eddie repeatedly blames as one of the reasons for his never achieving a life outside of Ruby Pier, which he had grown to loathe in his old age due to his mother's failing faculties making his father's job and a life at the pier impossible to escape.
Eddie then learns how the Captain died - something he had never put much consideration into before, as all the men in the platoon had lost touch with each other after the war. As the Captain and his men were making their escape from the prison camp, the men were tending to Eddie's leg wound in the back of the truck as the Captain cleared the path ahead. As he scouted ahead, he stepped on a land mine that would have destroyed the truck and killed all the Captain's men, instead making the battlefield the Captain's final resting place. Eddie learns his second lesson about the importance of people's willingness to make sacrifices for others, big and small.
After this revelation, the Captain shows Eddie the true nature of his Heaven, which is not in fact the battlefield that Eddie remembers. The war-torn environment around them makes way to the most serene, beautiful nature landscape that Eddie has ever seen. Eddie looks at the Captain to see a man he hardly recognized without the layer of ash and dirt on his face - a young man in a pristine, clean army uniform who explains that for his Heaven he wished to see what the world was like before war, fighting, conflicts, and cruelty. Eddie watches the Captain walk away after he tosses Eddie his old combat helmet. Inside the helmet, Eddie finds a foreshadowing of things to come: a single picture of his late wife Marguerite, the same one he carried with him during war times.
The scene changes, and Eddie finds himself outside in a snowdrift, but he notices that the snow is neither cold nor wet. He notices a diner where he sees his father through a window and begins yelling and pleading for his attention. When his father appears to not be able to hear him, a well-dressed woman named Ruby appears and introduces herself to him. He assumes she must have been rich based on the manner of her clothing. She tells him that she has not always been this way and proceeds to explain to Eddie her story. Ruby tells Eddie that she had once worked as a waitress at the diner and explains that Ruby Pier was named after her by her husband Emile, who built it in tribute to her. Emile was wounded while fighting a fire that burned much of Ruby Pier and later died from failing health.
Ruby confesses that she picked the diner because that was where she had met Emile and wanted the diner to be a refuge for anyone who had ever been hurt in any way by Ruby Pier. This is the reason that Eddie's father, a harsh and abusive man, became a part of Ruby's Heaven. Ruby teaches Eddie to release his anger and forgive his father for all the trouble and hurt he had caused, only after she showed him the true cause of his father's death. Mickey Shea, a man who worked on rides at Ruby Pier with Eddie's father, was at Eddie's house drunk and in a terrible emotional state. He pulls out a flask, downs it, and then proceeds to try and force himself onto Eddie's mother. Eddie's father walks in at this point and chases Mickey all the way to the pier, where Mickey jumps into the freezing water as an attempted suicide . Eddie's father jumps in after Mickey and saves him. Eddie's father later dies after falling ill due to being in the freezing water when he rescued Mickey.
Eddie now awakens in a room with several doors. Behind each of the doors there is a wedding from a different culture and Eddie meets his late wife, Marguerite, in one of the weddings. They spend an extended period together, moving from one wedding to the next and catching up on all the things they had not been able to share since Marguerite's death. They remember their own wedding, and in the end, Marguerite teaches Eddie that love is never lost in death.
Marguerite's love for weddings comes from the look in the bride and groom's eyes right before the ceremony; the shared feeling that their love will without a doubt break all the records. Marguerite asks Eddie at one point if he believed they had that; he simply replied, "We had an accordion player." (Eddie and Marguerite's wedding was on the rented top floor of a Chinese restaurant and was very low-budget, but the couple hold nothing but fond memories of the occasion - in Eddie's house, Dominguez finds a case of sentimental objects, including a restaurant menu from their wedding night.)
When Eddie awakens to a new scene, he sees children playing along a riverbed and a young Asian girl named Tala comes up to him. Tala reveals that she was the little girl from the hut that Eddie set on fire. The girl shows Eddie the burns that she suffered when dying from the fire, handing him a stone and telling him to "wash" the burns off. Eddie starts to scrape off the injuries he had inflicted on her and soon Tala is free of the scars.
Eddie believes that he failed to save the little girl from the amusement park and remembers feeling the girl's hands in his, just before his death, but Tala says that it was her hands that Eddie had felt as she pulled him safely up to Heaven. In reality, Eddie did manage to save the girl at Ruby Pier. Tala teaches Eddie that his life was not for nothing and that its purpose was to protect children at Ruby Pier through his care for the safety of the rides. In this way, Tala explains, he also managed to atone for her unnecessary death.
In the end, it shows that Eddie's Heaven was the Stardust Band Shell, where he met Marguerite. He is also one of the five people to be met by the girl whose life he saved when she dies.
Characters and their Characterizations
Eddie:
The protagonist and main character around who the story centers; at the start of the story, he is killed on his 83rd birthday. When he awakes in heaven, he is taken on a journey to meet five people whose lives intertwined with his in many ways which he never expected. [1]
Marguerite:
Eddie's wife who he met at Ruby Pier and married after returning from World War II. Eddie would always remember "her waving over her shoulder, her dark hair falling over one eye." [2] Marguerite has "olive skin" and "dark coffee eyes." [3] She dies at the age of forty-seven [4] of a brain tumor. [5]
Joseph Corvelzchik, The Blue Man:
Joseph's skin had been turned blue when he was a boy because of repeated ingestion of silver nitrate , thought to be an effective medication at the time. He had been given this medication to cure his "nervousness" and bed-wetting at a late age, and Joseph simply attributed all the side effects to not ingesting enough. Handicapped by this disfigurement, Joseph eventually made a life for himself at Ruby Pier.
Joseph is a "middle-aged man with narrow, stooped shoulders, naked from the waist up. His belly sagged over his belt. His hair was closely cropped. His lips were thin and his face was long and drawn." [6] He dies of a heart attack because of Eddie, when Eddie tried to get a ball off the streets and causes him to swerve his car to avoid hitting Eddie. [7]
The Captain: Eddie's commanding officer at war. He has a "full head of dark hair" and looked to be "only in his 30s." [8] The Captain saved Eddie's life by shooting him in the leg. [9] He died by stepping on a land mine while checking to ensure if there was a clear path ahead for his men. [10]
Ruby: A woman for whom Ruby Pier is named by her fiance Emile. Ruby's face was "gaunt, with sagging cheeks, rose-colored lipstick, and tightly pulled-back white hair." [11] She wore "wire-rimmed spectacles over narrow blue eyes." [11] She wore "a dress made of silk and chiffon with a bib-like bodice stitched with white beads and topped with a velvet bow just below her neck." [11] Her skirt had "a rhinestone buckle and snaps and hooks up the side" while also holding a " parasol with both hands." [11] She was a widow in her fifties. [12]
Emile: Ruby's husband, who also created the original Ruby Pier. He wore "a chalk-stripe suit and a derby hat." [13] He had neatly cut dark hair and a mustache that covered a constant smile. [13] Emile was known for "his heavy, confident laughter" [13] and being "a spender and a risk taker." [14] He was injured in a big fire trying to save Ruby Pier from being destroyed. [15]
Eddie's mother: Eddie's mother was known for her tenderness" towards Eddie and Joe. [16] She lived in a daze after the death of Eddie's father. [17]
Eddie's father: He abused Eddie his entire life. He smoked cigars [18] and was a card player. [19] Eddie's father was remembered for his "discipline" [16] or "violence" [20] and "denial of affection" [21] or "silence." [22] He dies at the age of fifty-six of pneumonia . [23]
Mickey Shea: He is a family friend. He worked with Eddie's father "fixing rides at Ruby Pier." [19] Mickey is "fat, wears suspenders and is always singing Irish songs. Mickey attempted to rape Eddie's mother because of loneliness and depression. Mickey and Eddie's father fought, and Mickey was almost killed by Eddie's dad, but eventually, ended up saving him from drowning in the ocean, causing the pneumonia that killed Eddie's father". [19]
Dominguez: He is Eddie's friend and coworker at Ruby Pier. He is "a lanky, bony-cheeked young man." [24] He is planning to go to Mexico with his wife Theresa and eventually takes Eddie's job as head of maintenance. [25]
Willie: Willie works the Freddy's Free Fall at Ruby Pier. [26]
Amy: Amy or Annie is the "little girl with a pipe-cleaner animal". [27] She is standing on the "ride's metal base" that one of Freddy's Free Fall's carts comes crashing down on. [28] Eddie doesn't know whether or not he saved her until the end of the book. [29]
Tala: Tala is a young girl Eddie sees in a burning hut. She is a Filipina, maybe five or six years old with "a beautiful cinnamon complexion, hair the color of dark plum, a small flat nose, full lips that spread joyfully over her gapped teeth, and the most arresting eyes." [30]
Nicky: Nicky is a young man who visited Ruby Pier, and practically the reason why Eddie died. He dropped his car keys in the Freddy's Free Fall ride, causing its gears to jam and its cable to snap. Nicky claims to be Ruby's great-grandson.
Allusions/references to other works
Selected Quotations
"It is because the human spirit knows, deep down, that all lives intersect. That death doesn't just take someone, it misses someone else, and in the small distance between being taken and being missed, lives are changed." [31]
"This comes from the sad, layered stories of life, which over the centuries have seen courage confused with picking up arms, and cowardice confused with laying them down." [32]
This section does not cite any references or sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .
(July 2013)
There are various themes in the book, with the overall theme of "there are no random acts in life", which echoes some main aspects of Taoist , Buddhist and Confucian beliefs.
The theme of the book changes as Eddie progresses through heaven, each theme being the lesson Eddie learns from each of the people he meets in heaven:
Blue Man: Everything happens for a reason. There are no random events in life. All lives and experiences are interconnected in some way, and even the little things you do can affect other people's lives and experiences dramatically.
The Captain: Sacrifices are a part of life. Everyone makes these sacrifices. Some sacrifices are big, and others are day-to-day small sacrifices, but they all make an impact in other people's lives.
Ruby: The importance of releasing anger and granting forgiveness. There is always more than one side to a story.
Marguerite The power of love, even after death. There are multiple forms of love, some stronger than others. Lost love is the strongest kind of love, the kind that can be felt even across enormous distances.
Tala: There's always a purpose for your life. You live for a reason the same way that people die for a reason. Where you are today is a combination of all your past actions, decisions, and the way the people around you have affected you.
Film
A made-for-television film adaptation of the novel, starring Jon Voight as Eddie, was released in 2004 and is available on DVD. Aside from a few details about Eddie's life and a more chronological telling of the story, the film is very faithful to the book.
