The History Boys is a play by British playwright Alan Bennett. The play premiered at the Lyttelton Theatre in London on 18 May 2004. Its Broadway debut was on 23 April 2006 at the Broadhurst Theatre where there were 185 performances staged before it closed on 1 October 2006. The play won multiple awards, including the 2005 Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play and the 2006 Tony Award for Best Play
Douglas Hector - English/General Studies teacher
Irwin - History teacher; brought in as a special coach
Mrs Dorothy Lintott - History teacher
Akthar - Pupil; of Asian ancestry, Muslim
Crowther - Pupil; does acting as a hobby
Stuart Dakin - Pupil; handsome, object of Posner's and Irwin's affection
James Lockwood - Pupil; strong opinions
David Posner - Pupil; youngest, gay and Jewish
Rudge - Pupil; better known for athletic skills than for intelligence
Donald Scripps - Pupil; Anglican, plays piano
Timms - Pupil; joker, overweight
Director on Irwin's television programme (a small role)
Irwin is said to be modelled after Niall Ferguson . [2]
The play includes several non-speaking roles:
Make-Up Woman, Production team - on Irwin's television show
Three or four unidentified MPs - spoken to by Irwin in opening scene
Other male pupils (optional, can help with scene changes and/or play piano if the actor cast as Scripps cannot)
Fiona - Headmaster's secretary; object of Dakin's affection/lust. Does not appear on stage in the published text, but was seen in filmed projections featuring Rio by Duran Duran during the original production[ citation needed ].
Productions
Royal National Theatre
The play opened at the Lyttelton Theatre (part of the National Theatre) in London on 18 May 2004, directed by Nicholas Hytner . It played to sell-out audiences and its limited run was frequently extended. Richard Griffiths , James Corden , Dominic Cooper , Russell Tovey and Andrew Knott were among the original cast. On 24 November 2005, the same production was revived once again at the Lyttelton Theatre where it played another successful run. Future Doctor Who actor Matt Smith took on the role of Lockwood in the November revision of the cast. The original cast reunited in the final week in February 2006.
International Tour
Following closing in London, the National Theatre production toured to Hong Kong in February 2006 and featured in the 2006 New Zealand International Arts Festival held in Wellington (February 2006) before playing at the Sydney Theatre in Sydney , Australia from 4 March to 8 April 2006. At each venue, the play was presented to sell-out audiences with the original London cast, including Richard Griffiths ; however, Frances de la Tour and Clive Merrison were replaced by Maggie Steed and Malcolm Sinclair until the Broadway season.
Broadway
The American premiere of the play took place on 23 April 2006 when the same National production opened on Broadway at the Broadhurst Theatre . [3] Originally scheduled to run through 2 September 2006, the run was extended through to 8 October 2006 following huge public demand after the show won the Tony, New York Critics Circle and other American theatrical awards.
West End
Following its Broadway triumph and second UK tour, the play opened at London's Wyndham's Theatre on 2 January 2007, following previews from 20 December 2006. The production closed on 14 April 2007. A further West End run of the play opened once again at the Wyndham's Theatre on 20 December 2007 running through 26 April 2008.
British National Tours
The first nation tour of the production opened in 2005, continuing to play nine regional venues. A second Britain wide tour began on 31 August 2006 at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre , touring to eight further venues. The latest (third) tour launched on 6 September 2007 at the Theatre Royal, Plymouth , before continuing to Truro , Cheltenham , Bath , Dublin , Blackpool , Leeds , Cambridge and Eastbourne before culminating in Newcastle on 10 November 2007.
A new national tour co-produced by the West Yorkshire Playhouse and Theatre Royal Bath commenced in early 2010. This was a new production not produced by the National Theatre and directed by Christopher Luscombe. The cast were as follows:
Headmaster: Thomas Wheatley
