The Jennifer Morgue is the second collection of stories by Charles Stross featuring Bob Oliver Francis Howard, containing the title novel The Jennifer Morgue, the short story "Pimpf", and an essay titled "The Golden Age of Spying". The collection is a sequel to the stories published in The Atrocity Archives (2004); a third book, The Fuller Memorandum, was released in July 2010. The stories are Lovecraftian spy thrillers involving a secret British intelligence agency known as "The Laundry", which deals with occult events and technology. Where 2004's The Atrocity Archives is written in the idiom of Len Deighton, The Jennifer Morgue is a pastiche of Ian Fleming's James Bond novels and refers to the real-life Project Azorian (incorrectly named by the press as Project Jennifer); Stross also uses footnotes and narrative causality, two literary devices common in the novels of Terry Pratchett. The included short story, "Pimpf", draws heavily on the mythos of online role-playing games as well as the "Bastard Operator from Hell" stories of Simon Travaglia. The Jennifer Morgue was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel in 2007.
The Fuller Memorandum
The Jennifer Morgue ( 2006 , ISBN 1-930846-45-2 ) is the second collection of stories by Charles Stross featuring Bob Oliver Francis Howard, containing the title novel The Jennifer Morgue, the short story "Pimpf", and an essay titled "The Golden Age of Spying". The collection is a sequel to the stories published in The Atrocity Archives (2004); a third book, The Fuller Memorandum , was released in July 2010. The stories are Lovecraftian spy thrillers involving a secret British intelligence agency known as "The Laundry", which deals with occult events and technology.
Where 2004's The Atrocity Archives is written in the idiom of Len Deighton , The Jennifer Morgue is a pastiche of Ian Fleming 's James Bond novels and refers to the real-life Project Azorian (incorrectly named by the press as Project Jennifer); Stross also uses footnotes and narrative causality , two literary devices common in the novels of Terry Pratchett . The included short story, "Pimpf", draws heavily on the mythos of online role-playing games as well as the " Bastard Operator from Hell " stories of Simon Travaglia .
The Jennifer Morgue was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Fantasy Novel in 2007. [1]
