Evil Under the Sun is a work of detective fiction by Agatha Christie and first published in the UK by the Collins Crime Club in June 1941 and in the US by Dodd, Mead and Company in October of the same year. The UK edition retailed at seven shillings and sixpence (7/6) and the US edition at $2.00.
Captain Kenneth Marshall, in his 40s, Arlena's husband, stiff, proud
Arlena Stuart Marshall, former actress, Kenneth's wife
Linda Marshall 16, Kenneth's daughter, Arlena's stepdaughter, naive and precocious
Patrick Redfern, Christine's husband, infatuated with Arlena
Christine Redfern, Patrick's wife, pretty "in a washed out way", "mousy"
Rosamund Darnley, fashionable dressmaker, Kenneth's long-ago sweetheart
Emily Brewster, athletic spinster, rows daily
Mrs Carrie Gardener, garrulous American tourist
Mr Odell Gardener, echoes his wife
Horace Blatt, large and too loud, avoided by everyone
Reverend Stephen Lane, who calls Arlena Marshall "evil through and through"
Major Barry, retired officer talks endlessly about India
Gladys Narracott, chambermaid in the Jolly Roger Hotel
Mrs Castle, owner of the Jolly Roger Hotel.
Literary significance and reception
The verdict by Maurice Willson Disher in The Times Literary Supplement of 14 June 1941 was positive: "To maintain a place at the head of detective-writers would be difficult enough without the ever increasing rivalry. Even Miss Christie cannot stay there unchallenged though she has a following which will swear her books are best without reading the others. Unbiased opinion may have given the verdict against her last season when new arrivals set a very hot pace; but Evil Under the Sun will take a lot of beating now". After summarising the plot, the Mr. Disher concluded: "Miss Christie casts the shadow of guilt upon first one and then another with such casual ease that it is difficult for the reader not to be led by the nose. Everybody is well aware that any character most strongly indicated is not a likely criminal; yet this guiding principle is forgotten when Miss Christie persuades you that you are more discerning than you really are. Then she springs her secret like a land-mine." [3]
In The New York Times Book Review of 19 October 1941, Isaac Anderson wrote, "The murder is an elaborately planned affair – a little too much so for credibility, in view of the many possibilities of a slip-up somewhere along the way – but Poirot's reasoning is flawless, as it always is. Evil Under the Sun adds another to the already long list of Agatha Christie's successful mystery tales." [4]
Maurice Richardson in a short review in 8 June 1941 issue of The Observer said, "Best Agatha Christie since Ten Little Indians – and one can't say much more than that – Evil Under the Sun has luxury summer hotel, closed-circle setting, Poirot in white trousers. Victim: redhead actress man-mad. Smashing solution, after clouds of dust thrown in your eyes, ought to catch you right out. Light as a soufflé." [5]
The Scotsman of 3 July 1941 spoke of the "surprising discoveries" in the book's solution and said, "All of these the reader may best be left to encounter for himself in the assurance that the quest will prove as piquant as any this skilful writer has offered." [6]
E.R. Punshon in The Guardian of 26 August 1941 briefly summed up the plot in a eulogistic piece which began, "Is it going too far to call Mrs. Agatha Christie one of the most remarkable writers of the day?" [7]
Robert Barnard : "The classic Christie marital triangle plot set in West Country seaside resort, with particular play on the alikeness of sunbathing bodies, and dead ones. Possibly overingenious and slightly uncharacterised." [8]
References to other works
The plot has some similarities to the Christie short story, Triangle at Rhodes, which was first published in the US in This Week magazine in February 1936 and in the UK in issue 545 of the Strand Magazine in May 1936 and included in the collection Murder in the Mews (US title: Dead Man's Mirror) one year later.
In Triangle at Rhodes, Poirot again witnesses an apparent liaison between two married people. Again everyone believes that the responsible party is the beautiful Valentine Chantry, who is the murder victim. In Triangle at Rhodes the murder is by poison and it is thought that Chantry and her lover attempted to murder her husband and that the plot went wrong. Poirot, however, reveals that the murder was committed by Chantry's husband in cahoots with her apparent lover's wife, Mrs Gold, who intended to frame her hapless husband. In both stories, the key twist is that the appearance of the seductress's power deflects attention from the reality of the situation. In Triangle at Rhodes, Mrs Gold says of Valentine Chantry “in spite of her money and her good looks and all […] she's not the sort of woman men really stick to. She's the sort of woman, I think, that men would get tired of very easily." In Evil under the Sun, Poirot says of Arlena Marshall that she "[w]as the type of woman whom men care for easily and of whom they easily tire."
The character of Colonel Weston had originally appeared in Peril at End House and makes reference to that case upon his first appearance, in Chapter 5. Minor character Mrs Gardener is herself an admirer of Poirot's exploits and refers to the case of Death on the Nile in Chapter 1 of this novel.
The title refers to Ecclesiastes 6:1, which reads, "There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, and it lies heavy upon humankind." (NRSV) Ecclesiastes 6:2 continues, "those to whom God gives wealth, possessions, and honor, so that they lack nothing of all that they desire, yet God does not enable them to enjoy these things, but a stranger enjoys them. This is vanity; it is a grievous ill."
Film, radio, TV or theatrical adaptations
