The Murder of Roger Ackroyd is a work of detective fiction by Agatha Christie, first published in the United Kingdom by William Collins, Sons in June 1926 and in the United States by Dodd, Mead and Company on the 19th of the same month. It features Hercule Poirot as the lead detective. The UK edition retailed at seven shillings and sixpence (7/6) and the US edition at $2.00. It is one of Christie's best known and most controversial novels, its innovative twist ending having a significant impact on the genre. The short biography of Christie which is included in the present UK printings of all of her books states that this novel is her masterpiece. Howard Haycraft, in his seminal 1941 work, Murder for Pleasure, included the novel in his "cornerstones" list of the most influential crime novels ever written. The character of Caroline Sheppard was later acknowledged by Christie as a possible precursor to her famous detective Miss Marple.
This section requires expansion .
(August 2012)
The book is set in the fictional village of King's Abbott in England. It is narrated by Dr James Sheppard, who becomes Poirot's assistant (a role filled by Captain Hastings in several other Poirot novels). The story begins with the death of Mrs. Ferrars, a wealthy widow who is rumoured to have murdered her husband. Her death is initially believed to be an accident until Roger Ackroyd, a widower who had been expected to marry Mrs. Ferrars, reveals that she admitted to killing her husband and then committed suicide. Shortly after this he is found murdered. The suspects include Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd, Roger's neurotic, hypochondriac sister-in-law who has accumulated personal debts through extravagant spending; her daughter Flora; Major Blunt, a big-game hunter ; Geoffrey Raymond, Ackroyd's personal secretary; Ralph Paton, Ackroyd's stepson and another person with heavy debts; Parker, a snooping butler; and Ursula Bourne, a parlourmaid with an uncertain history who resigned her post the afternoon of the murder. Dr Sheppard's spinster sister Caroline is a favourite character among readers, and some say she is worthy to have appeared in another book.
The initial suspect is Ralph, who is engaged to Flora and stands to inherit his stepfather's fortune. Several critical pieces of evidence seem to point to Ralph. Poirot, who has just moved to the town, begins to investigate at Flora's behest.
The ending and the identity of the murderer
The book ends with an unprecedented plot twist . Poirot exonerates all of the original suspects. He then lays out a completely reasoned case that the murderer is in fact Dr Sheppard, who has not only been Poirot's assistant, but also the story's narrator. Dr Sheppard was Mrs Ferrars' blackmailer, and he murdered Ackroyd to stop him learning the truth from Mrs Ferrars. Poirot gives the doctor two choices: either he surrenders to the police; or, for the sake of his reputation and of his proud sister, he commits suicide.
In the final chapter of Sheppard's narrative (a sort of epilogue ), Sheppard admits his guilt, noting certain literary techniques he used to write the narrative truthfully without revealing his role in the crime or doing anything to suggest that he knew the truth. He reveals that he had hoped to be the one to write the account of Poirot's great failure: i.e., not solving the murder of Roger Ackroyd. Thus, the last chapter acts as both Sheppard's confession and his suicide note.
The final revelation uses meta-fictional tropes . The ending also opens up the question as to whether narrators can be trusted. Christie uses an unreliable narrator again in 1967 novel Endless Night . Her earlier novel, The Man in the Brown Suit , is narrated by two people, one of whom is unreliable. Reader response to the ending varies from admiration of the unexpected end to a feeling of being cheated
Juxtaposition of two knowledge systems
In the novel, Christie has laid side by side two modes of gathering information and building an hypothesis. One is Poirot's use of ratiocination ; the other is the gossiping practised by almost all of the inhabitants of King's Abbott, Caroline in particular. Although even Caroline is able to interpret certain situations correctly, Christie privileges the scientific mode of investigation by unveiling the murderer through Poirot.
Hercule Poirot – retired detective who investigates the central murder
Roger Ackroyd – country gentleman, distressed by the recent death of his paramour, Mrs Ferrars
Mrs Cecil Ackroyd – Mr Ackroyd's sister-in-law
Flora Ackroyd – Mr Ackroyd's niece and Mrs Cecil Ackroyd's daughter
Ralph Paton – Mr Ackroyd's stepson, often referred to as his "adopted" son
Ursula Bourne – Mr Ackroyd's parlourmaid, who has recently resigned
Major Hector Blunt – big game hunter, Roger Ackroyd's friend and house guest
Geoffrey Raymond – Mr Ackroyd's secretary
John Parker – Mr Ackroyd's butler
Elizabeth Russell – Mr Ackroyd's housekeeper
Charles Kent – Elizabeth Russell's son, and a drug addict
Dr James Sheppard – the doctor, Poirot's assistant, and the story's narrator
Caroline Sheppard – Dr Sheppard's spinster sister
Dorothy Ferrars – who poisons herself at the very beginning of the book
Ashley Ferrars – late husband of Mrs Ferrars, who was poisoned by his wife
Inspector Raglan
Mr Hammond – Roger Ackroyd's lawyer
Literary significance and reception
The Times Literary Supplement 's review of 10 June 1926, began with "This is a well-written detective story of which the only criticism might perhaps be that there are too many curious incidents not really connected with the crime which have to be elucidated before the true criminal can be discovered". The review then gave a brief synopsis before concluding with "It is all very puzzling, but the great Hercule Poirot, a retired Belgian detective, solves the mystery. It may safely be asserted that very few readers will do so." [5]
A long review in The New York Times Book Review of 18 July 1926, read in part:
There are doubtless many detective stories more exciting and blood-curdling than The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, but this reviewer has recently read very few which provide greater analytical stimulation. This story, though it is inferior to them at their best, is in the tradition of Poe's analytical tales and the Sherlock Holmes stories. The author does not devote her talents to the creation of thrills and shocks, but to the orderly solution of a single murder, conventional at that, instead. [6]
...
Miss Christie is not only an expert technician and a remarkably good story-teller, but she knows, as well, just the right number of hints to offer as to the real murderer. In the present case his identity is made all the more baffling through the author's technical cleverness in selecting the part he is to play in the story; and yet her non-committal characterization of him makes it a perfectly fair procedure. The experienced reader will probably spot him, but it is safe to say that he will often have his doubts as the story unfolds itself. [6]
The Observer of 30 May 1926, said,
No one is more adroit than Miss Christie in the manipulation of false clues and irrelevances and red herrings; and The Murder of Roger Ackroyd makes breathless reading from first to the unexpected last. It is unfortunate that in two important points – the nature of the solution and the use of the telephone – Miss Christie has been anticipated by another recent novel: the truth is that this particular field is getting so well ploughed that it is hard to find a virgin patch anywhere. But Miss Christie's story is distinguished from most of its class by its coherence, its reasonableness, and the fact that the characters live and move and have their being: the gossip-loving Caroline would be an acquisition to any novel. [7]
The Scotsman of 22 July 1926, said,
When in the last dozen pages of Miss Christie's detective novel, the answer comes to the question, "Who killed Roger Ackroyd?" the reader will feel that he has been fairly, or unfairly, sold up. Up till then he has been kept balancing in his mind from chapter to chapter the probabilities for or against the eight or nine persons at whom suspicion points. ... Everybody in the story appears to have a secret of his or her own hidden up the sleeve, the production of which is imperative in fitting into place the pieces in the jigsaw puzzle; and in the end it turns out that the Doctor himself is responsible for the largest bit of reticence. The tale may be recommended as one of the cleverest and most original of its kind. [8]
Robert Barnard , in A Talent to Deceive: An appreciation of Agatha Christie, writes:
Apart — and it is an enormous "apart" — from the sensational solution, this is a fairly conventional Christie. ... A classic, but there are some better Christies. [9]
Laura Thompson , Christie's biographer, wrote:
The Murder of Roger Ackroyd is the supreme, the ultimate detective novel. It rests upon the most elegant of all twists, the narrator who is revealed to be the murderer. This twist is not merely a function of plot: it puts the whole concept of detective fiction on an armature and sculpts it into a dazzling new shape. It was not an entirely new idea ... nor was it entirely her own idea ... but here, she realised, was an idea worth having. And only she could have pulled it off so completely. Only she had the requisite control, the willingness to absent herself from the authorial scene and let her plot shine clear. [10]
In 1944–1946, the noted American literary critic Edmund Wilson attacked the entire mystery genre in a set of three columns in The New Yorker . The second, in the 20 January 1945 issue, was titled "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?" [11]
Pierre Bayard , literature professor and author, in Qui a tué Roger Ackroyd? (Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?), re-investigates Agatha Christie's Ackroyd, proposing an alternative solution. He argues in favour of a different murderer – Sheppard's sister, Caroline – and says Christie subconsciously knew who the real culprit is. [12]
