Lake Wobegon Days is a novel by Garrison Keillor, first published in hardcover by Viking in 1985. Based on material from his radio show A Prairie Home Companion, the book brought Keillor's work to a much wider audience and achieved international success. Like some of Keillor's other books, it is unusual in that it could be said that the audiobook preceded the publication in written form. The work is a humorous account of life in fictitious Lake Wobegon, Minnesota, a heartland small town. Its early chapters are written in the form and style of a history of the town and later ones chronicle the lives, concerns, and activities of its inhabitants, with intergenerational tensions and relationships forming a major theme. Most of the latter material was originally delivered on radio in the form of monologues. Due to the nature of the original material, the second half of the novel has many recurring characters but little in the way of plot, resembling an incompletely integrated group of short stories.
Leaving Home: a Collection of Lake Wobegon Stories
Lake Wobegon Days [1] is a novel by Garrison Keillor , first published in hardcover by Viking in 1985. Based on material from his radio show A Prairie Home Companion , the book brought Keillor's work to a much wider audience and achieved international success. Like some of Keillor's other books, it is unusual in that it could be said that the audiobook preceded the publication in written form.
The work is a humorous account of life in fictitious Lake Wobegon , Minnesota , a heartland small town. Its early chapters are written in the form and style of a history of the town and later ones chronicle the lives, concerns, and activities of its inhabitants, with intergenerational tensions and relationships forming a major theme. Most of the latter material was originally delivered on radio in the form of monologues. Due to the nature of the original material, the second half of the novel has many recurring characters but little in the way of plot, resembling an incompletely integrated group of short stories.
