By The Great Horn Spoon! Author(s) Sid FleischmanIllustrator Eric von SchmidtCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) Children's novelPublisher Little, Brown and CompanyPublication date 1963Media type PrintPages 193 By The Great Horn Spoon! is a children's novel by Sid Fleischman, published in 1963. This story takes place in the California Gold Rush. The main characters of the book are Praiseworthy, a butler, and Jack, a twelve-year old boy who lived with his Aunt Arabella since his parents died and met Praiseworthy who head to California to search for gold after Jack's Aunt Arabella loses all her money. They are stowaways on a ship, The Lady Wilma, and uncover the villain on the ship that stole their money for tickets. Along the way, they share a cabin with people like Dr. Buckbee, the horse doctor with the peg leg, or Mountain Jim, a big guy who saves a pig from the cook. When they reach San Francisco, they head for the gold mines, but meet other villains (including the one they unmasked on the ship whose name was "Cut-Eye" Higgins) but also nice miners, such as Pitch-Pine Billy and Jimmie-from-Town and others. This book was turned into a movie called The Adventures of Bullwhip Griffin (1967) by Disney, which changed the name of the butler character (Praiseworthy), as well as many other components of the storyline and plot.
Pages
193
By The Great Horn Spoon! is a children's novel by Sid Fleischman , published in 1963. This story takes place in the California Gold Rush . A twelve-year old boy named Jack, who lived with his Aunt Arabella since his parents died, heads to California to search for gold after Aunt Arabella loses all her money. He is accompanied by Aunt Arabella's butler Praiseworthy. As the novel opens, they are stowaways on a ship, The Lady Wilma. They are put to work in the ship's coal bunkers, but they later uncover the villain on the ship that stole their money for tickets. After they become legitimate passengers, they share a cabin with people like Dr. Buckbee, the horse doctor with the peg leg, or Mountain Jim, a huge guy who helps Jack save a pig from the cook. When they reach San Francisco, they head for the gold mines and encounter a number of friendly miners - such as Quartz Jackson, Buffalo John, Jimmie-From-Town, and Pitch-pine Billy Pierce. Along the way they encounter Cut-Eye Higgins, the villain who stole their money earlier.
This book was turned into a movie called The Adventures of Bullwhip Griffin (1967) by Disney , which changed the name of the butler character (Praiseworthy), as well as many other components of the storyline and plot.
Characters
Jack, a twelve year-old boy from Boston. He goes to California to find gold and save his Aunt Arabella's house.
Praiseworthy, Jack's loyal companion and butler
Aunt Arabella, Jack's aunt
Cut-Eye Higgins, a "dentist" and a judge.
Mountain Ox, a strong man that Praiseworthy fights and beats
Constance and Sarah, Jack's younger sisters
Captain Swain, the captain on the ship that Jack and Praiseworthy took
Pitch-Pine-Billy, a kind miner
