This is the article about the novel. For the films adapted from James' novel, see The Wings of the Dove (film). The Wings of the Dove {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=200px|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}1st UK editionAuthor(s) Henry JamesCountry United Kingdom, United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) NovelPublisher Archibald Constable & Co. , London</br>Charles Scribner's Sons, New York CityPublication date Constable: 30-Aug-1902</br>Scribner's: 21-Aug-1902Media type PrintPages Constable: 576</br>Scribner's: volume one, 329; volume two, 439ISBN NAOCLC Number 25895745 The Wings of the Dove is a 1902 novel by Henry James. This novel tells the story of Milly Theale, an American heiress stricken with a serious disease, and her effect on the people around her. Some of these people befriend Milly with honorable motives, while others are more self-interested.
Inspiration
Milly is based on Minny Temple (1845–1870), James' beloved cousin who died from tuberculosis. In his autobiography James said that The Wings of the Dove was his attempt to wrap her memory in the "beauty and dignity of art." But as he also said in the preface to the New York Edition text of the novel, James had to prepare the situation that was to occupy Milly for the last months of her life. He succeeded admirably in building up the background of Kate and Densher's inability to marry because of a lack of money.
Literary significance and criticism
The Wings of the Dove has one of the strongest critical positions of any of James' works, although James himself sometimes expressed dissatisfaction with it. In his preface to the New York Edition, James spent much time confessing to supposed faults in the novel: defective structure, characters not as well presented as they could be, and a general failure to realize his initial plan for the book.
By and large, critics have regarded these faults as venial or nonexistent. Instead, they've concentrated on the central characters and supporting cast, and the technique that James uses in their presentation.
In 1998 , the Modern Library ranked The Wings of the Dove 26th on its list of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century .
Theatrical, television, and film adaptations
The Wings of the Dove was adapted for television in 1959, when it was presented on Playhouse 90 by CBS. It starred Dana Wynter as Kate Croy. Merton Densher, played by James Donald , was renamed Miles Denshaw for this version. The first television production, presented in 1952 on Westinghouse Studio One (also on CBS), had featured Charlton Heston in one of his first starring roles as Merton Densher. Composer Douglas Moore adapted the work into an opera which was given its premiere at the New York City Opera on October 12, 1961. The novel was adapted as a stage play and successfully produced on the West End in 1963 starring Wendy Hiller . It was again adapted as a television play by the BBC in 1965 (directed by Rudolph Cartier ). Terence Feely's ITV series "Affairs of the Heart" included a version, under the title "Milly". This suggested, through almost Austenianly vague hints, that what Milly needed, and ought to be given, was not marriage, as an institution, but sexual fulfilment. The conversationally coy hinting seemed like that which occurs in E.M. Forster's fiction. One extremely brief scene suggests, and almost shows, that Kate willingly gives herself physically to Merton, as the sensual price (and promise of their future marriage, after Milly dies)for his agreement to pretend to woo Milly. Another TV adaptation occurred in 1979 starring John Castle and Suzanne Bertish . The Wings of the Dove was then eventually made into a theatrical film, first in 1981 and again in 1997 . Ian Softley directed, with Helena Bonham Carter as Kate Croy, Alison Elliott as Milly Theale, and Linus Roache as Merton Densher. The film got mostly favorable reviews, and did decent business at the box office. Bonham Carter received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress , while the film garnered many other awards nominations, and won several prizes.
References
The Wings of the Dove: Authoritative Text, The Author and the Novel, Criticism edited by J. Donald Crowley and Richard Hocks (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2003) ISBN 0-393-97881-8
The Novels of Henry James by Edward Wagenknecht (New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1983) ISBN 0-8044-2959-6
The Novels of Henry James by Oscar Cargill (New York: Macmillan Co., 1961)
