Up Country is a thriller novel by Nelson DeMille released in 2002. Set in contemporary Vietnam, the novel features the return of the character of Paul Brenner, a investigator for the United States Army Criminal Investigation Command and the protagonist of DeMille's The General's Daughter (1992). Brenner and his girlfriend drive to the Vietnamese Demilitarized Zone from the capital, Saigon, with the intention of solving a cold case murder from thirty years previously, in which an American soldier was shot dead by a superior officer. En route, Brenner recounts to her the battles he fought in during the Vietnam War. These recalled conflicts are in fact those the author engaged in during the Tet Offensive as an infantry officer of the army's First Cavalry Division; DeMille has characterized the work as his most personal since his 1978 debut By the Rivers of Babylon. Paramount Pictures, the production company responsible for the 1999 film adaptation The General's Daughter have bought the rights to Up Country, with actor John Travolta slated to return as Brenner. Up Country was published by Warner Books.
The General's Daughter
Up Country is a thriller novel by Nelson DeMille released in 2002. [1] [2] Set in contemporary Vietnam , the novel features the return of the character of Paul Brenner, a retired US Army Chief Warrant Officer and an investigator for the United States Army Criminal Investigation Command and the protagonist of DeMille's The General's Daughter (1992). [2] Brenner and his new girlfriend drive north through the former Vietnamese Demilitarized Zone from the old capital of Saigon , now Ho Chi Minh City , with the intention of solving a cold case murder from thirty years previously, in which an American soldier was shot dead by a superior officer. [1] En route, Brenner recounts to her the battles he fought in during the Vietnam War . [2] These recalled conflicts are in fact those the author engaged in during the Tet Offensive as an infantry officer of the army's First Cavalry Division ; DeMille has characterized the work as his most personal since his 1978 debut By the Rivers of Babylon . [2]
Paramount Pictures , the motion-picture studio that was responsible for the 1999 film adaptation The General's Daughter , likewise bought the rights to Up Country, with actor John Travolta slated to return as Brenner. [2] Up Country was published by Warner Books .
