The Story Girl is a 1911 novel by Canadian author L. M. Montgomery. It narrates the adventures of a group of young cousins and their friends who live in a rural community on Prince Edward Island, Canada. The book is narrated by Beverley, who together with his brother Felix, has come to live with his Aunt Janet and Uncle Alec King on their farm while their father travels for business. They spend their leisure time with their cousins Dan, Felicity and Cecily King, hired boy Peter Craig, neighbour Sara Ray and another cousin, Sara Stanley. The latter is the Story Girl of the title, and she entertains the group with fascinating tales including various events in the King family history. "I do like a road, because you can be always wondering what is at the end of it," once said Sara Stanley, also known as the Story Girl. She is enlightening and brings about a glow to the reader's heart. The sequel to the book is The Golden Road, written in 1913. The Story Girl was one of the books which inspired the Canadian television series Road to Avonlea.
The Golden Road
The Story Girl is a 1911 novel by Canadian author L. M. Montgomery . It narrates the adventures of a group of young cousins and their friends who live in a rural community on Prince Edward Island , Canada.
The book is narrated by Beverley, who together with his brother Felix, has come to live with his Aunt Janet and Uncle Alec King on their farm while their father travels for business. They spend their leisure time with their cousins Dan, Felicity and Cecily King, hired boy Peter Craig, neighbour Sara Ray and another cousin, Sara Stanley. The latter is the Story Girl of the title, and she entertains the group with fascinating tales including various events in the King family history. "I do like a road, because you can be always wondering what is at the end of it," once said Sara Stanley, also known as the Story Girl. She is enlightening and brings about a glow to the reader's heart. The sequel to the book is The Golden Road , written in 1913.
The Story Girl was one of the books which inspired the Canadian television series Road to Avonlea .
