Running Out of Time is a novel by Margaret Peterson Haddix.
Plot summary
Jessie is a 13-year-old girl from the village of Clifton, Indiana, in the 1840s. During a village-wide outbreak of diphtheria , Jessie's mother reveals it is actually 1996, and Clifton Village is a tourist attraction, a replica of a historical village. She secretly sends Jessie out of the village to retrieve a cure for the disease from a man, Isaac Neeley, who did not think that Clifton should be a tourist attraction. Jessie's escape will be difficult, because Clifton is guarded to ensure that none of the villagers leaves or finds out that it is actually 1996.
As Jessie escapes underground she is almost caught by guards, and almost loses the package of food and money her mother gave her. She stays overnight in a restroom until she is able to leave the tourist area. Once she makes it to town, Jessie is frequently confused by the technological advancements of the modern world. After meeting with Neeley at a KFC, she returns with him to his apartment, where he attempts to drug her so he can kill her. She overhears a conversation where he says that she knows too much about the outside world. Jessie wakes up the next day and manages to escape through a window in his apartment.
Jessie convinces local newspapers and radio stations to attend a press conference on the steps of the Capitol building. When the media arrives, Jessie begins to explain the situation, but faints due to diphtheria, which infected her before she left Clifton. At the press conference, she learned that the man she thought was Isaac Neeley was actually Frank Lyle, a scientist and business partner of Miles Clifton, the founder of Clifton Village. The real Isaac Neeley had died. After it is revealed that Clifton had allowed Lyle and others to use his village to try to create a stronger human gene pool that would be able to resist disease without the aid of medicine, Clifton Village is closed.
When Jessie wakes up, she leaves her bedroom and finds him talking about the diphtheria outbreak in the Clifton Village. She discovers that several other members of the Clifton Village have been brought to the hospital. Her parents are not among those who were arrested, but they will have to convince the authorities that they didn't put any of their six children in danger. Jessie's mother is allowed to visit Jessie in the hospital. She explains that her father still rejects life in the 20th century. After Clifton Village closes, Jessie lives in the year 1996.
Plagiarism allegation
Simon & Schuster , who published Running Out of Time, claimed that the film The Village had stolen ideas from the book. [1] The film had a plot which features a village whose inhabitants choose to live in a manner reminiscent of that of the 1800s when the year is actually 2004. The film also includes a young female protagonist who escapes the village in order to acquire medical supplies.
