The Highly Sensitive Person is a non-fiction book by psychologist Elaine N. Aron, PhD, that discusses highly sensitive persons (HSPs). Aron has characterized highly sensitive persons as having "increased sensitivity to stimulation" and who "are more aware of subtleties and process information in a deeper, more reflective way."
Content and concepts
Definition and traits
Aron has defined highly sensitive persons (HSPs) in terms of "an increased sensitivity to stimulation" and being "more aware of subtleties and process(ing) information in a deeper, more reflective way. [1] By implication, HSPs "pick up so much subtle information, then pause and reflect before they act" and thus "aren't going to do impulsive things...that get people into a lot of trouble." [1] She added that HSPs "have valuable information—like the canaries in the mine (that) sound the alarm when something is wrong," but are often misunderstood. [1]
Determining sensitivity
Aron has offered guidelines for determining the degree to which one is highly sensitive, the guidelines including: being easily overwhelmed by things like bright lights, strong smells, coarse fabrics, or nearby sirens; sensitivity to pain; need for withdrawal to a private location for relief from stimulation; discomfort with loud noises; difficulty sleeping; being easily startled; being rattled when having a lot to do in a short amount of time; and being called sensitive or shy as a child. [1]
Examples of highly sensitive persons
Aron has described Carl Jung , Emily Dickinson , Rainer Maria Rilke as being highly sensitive persons, adding that HSPs are "traditionally poets, writers, teachers, doctors, healers, lawyers, scientists, philosophers and theologians." [1]
Influence and reception
Susan Cain's 2012 book Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking referred extensively to Aron's work, with Cain commenting on her website that "For more about sensitivity, you can’t do better than read the works of Elaine Aron and Jerome Kagan." [2] (Concerning the distinction between sensitivity and introversion, Aron and her husband Arthur Aron published a 1997 paper "Sensory-Processing Sensitivity and its Relation to Introversion and Emotionality." [3]
