Gate of Ivory, Gate of Horn is a fantasy novel by British author Robert Holdstock. It was originally published in the United States in 1997 (and in the UK under the title Gate of Ivory in 1998. ) The story is a prequel to Mythago Wood and explores Christian Huxley's quest into Ryhope Wood and the apparent suicide of his mother, Jennifer Huxley. The title of the book refers to the gates of horn and ivory described in both Homer's Odyssey and Virgil's Aeneid. Because the story is a prequel, reading the novel Mythago Wood and the novella The Bone Forest will illuminate Gate of Ivory, Gate of Horn for first time readers. Reading the Wikipedia article on Mythago Wood will help in understanding issues and terminology in this article.
Main character of the story and older brother of Stephen Huxley.
George Huxley  
Father of Stephen and Christian and husband to Jennifer. George is a tall man lean man who is a scientist in the field of psychology who has studied with Carl Jung . He has also researched archaeology and obsesses over myths. Over the course of his studies of Ryhope wood, George produces a scientific journal in six volumes, a personal diary and a detailed map of Ryhope wood.
Jennifer Huxley 
Wife of George and mother of Stephen and Christian. Her suicide is a central issue in Gate of Ivory, Gate of Horn.
Stephen Huxley 
Mythagos
Abandagora 
A male Saracen who is brought back to life and is a member of Legion's advanced scouting group, "Forlorn Hope."
Eletherion 
The oldest warrior son of Kyrdu. Eletherion is Kylhuk's foe.
Elidyr 
A boatman who is a mythical combination of Bran and Charon , this 10-foot-tall (3.0 m) man takes the dead through the twin gates to the land of the dead. The boatman has the ability to travel through space and time and bring the dead back to life, but only before they pass through the twin gates.
Guiwenneth of the Green (also Gwyneth) 
This female mythago (usually evoked as an older teenager) hearkens from the Bronze Age and appears in various incarnations throughout time, including protomyth, a girl from Roman Britain , a manifestation of the Earth goddess , young Celtic warrior princess and Guinevere . [4] Each of Gwyneth's incarnations has a varied personality, some dangerous and other alluring, and differing relations with the members of the Huxley family.
The leader Forlorn Hope. Elidyr brings Gwyr back to life from the ashes. Gwyr is an interpreter of languages and sounder of the war horn.
Issabeau  
A female member of Forlorn hope who is a Sorceress and Shapeshifter who served as an apprentice to Merlin . Issabeau has fair skin and long black hair. She shares the same primary myth as Someone.
Jarag  
