The Halloween Tree is a 1972 fantasy novel by American author Ray Bradbury which traces the history of Samhain and Halloween.
Plot summary
A group of eight boys set out to go trick-or-treating on Halloween , only to discover that a ninth friend, Pipkin, has been whisked away on a journey that could determine whether he lives or dies. Through the help of a mysterious character named Carapace Clavicle Moundshroud, they pursue their friend across time and space through Ancient Egyptian , Ancient Greek , and Roman cultures , Celtic Druidism , Notre Dame Cathedral in Medieval Paris , and The Day of the Dead in Mexico . Along the way, they learn the origins of the holiday that they celebrate, and the role that the fear of death, spooks, and the haunts has played in shaping civilization. The Halloween Tree itself, with its many branches laden with jack-o'-lanterns , serves as a metaphor for the historical confluence of these traditions.
Background
The novel originated in 1967 as the screenplay for an unproduced collaboration with animator Chuck Jones . In 1992, Bradbury wrote and narrated a feature-length animated version of the novel for television, for which he won an Emmy Award . A longer limited-edition "author's preferred text" of the novel, compiled and edited by Donn Albright, was published in 2005. This edition also included both the 1967 and 1992 screenplays. [1]
Bradbury dedicated "The Halloween Tree" to Man'Ha Dombasle (1898–1999), a French writer and translator who was the maternal grandmother of the actress and singer Arielle Dombasle and the wife of Maurice Garreau-Dombasle, a French ambassador to Mexico.
Illustrations
The Halloween Tree is illustrated by Joe Mugnaini , one of Bradbury's many collaborators over the years. Joe Mugnaini has illustrated many novels with Bradbury, and Bradbury also owned many examples of Mugnaini's artwork.
Adaptation
In 1993, Hanna-Barbera produced a feature length animated television movie by the same title based on the Bradbury book. It won an Emmy Award in 1994.
Disneyland
On October 31, 2007, Bradbury attended the presentation of a Halloween Tree at Disneyland in California, to be included as part of its annual park-wide Halloween decorations every year.
