New and Selected Poems is a collection of poems by Samuel Menashe, first published in 2005 by the Library of America as part of the American Poets project, after the author received the Neglected Masters Award from the Poetry Foundation. A second (expanded) edition was published in 2008. The 2009 printing by Bloodaxe Books also features a DVD of the film Life is Immense: Visiting Samuel Menashe by Pamela Robertson-Pearce.
708333510
New and Selected Poems is a collection of poems by Samuel Menashe , first published in 2005 by the Library of America as part of the American Poets project, after the author received the Neglected Masters Award from the Poetry Foundation . A second (expanded) edition was published in 2008. The 2009 printing by Bloodaxe Books also features a DVD of the film Life is Immense: Visiting Samuel Menashe by Pamela Robertson-Pearce .
Contents
This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose . You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate . Editing help is available.
(June 2012)
Giving the Day Its Due, by Samuel Menashe [1]
The Poets on Samuel Menashe (Donald Davie [2] [3] and Stephen Spender [4] )
Introduction, by Christopher Ricks
Critical reception
David Orr , writing in The New York Times , described Menashe as a "wry but essentially optimistic poet, and his best writing demonstrates that the stylistic limitations we choose quickly cease to be limitations, even when we identify them as such", singling out Menashe's poem "The Niche" for praise. [5] David Kaufmann, writing in The Forward , noted that "Menashe might well be the most recognized unrecognized American poet of the past 40 years" but suggested New and Selected Poems "could change all that". [6] Clive Wilmer , writing in The Guardian , concurred, writing "The literary world has not been kind to Menashe, as is often the case with poets who make no claims on it" and comparing Menashe to William Blake . [7]
References
^ First published in Metre , 7-8, 142 (2000). Download .
^ From Donald Davie; Barry Alpert (1977). The poet in the imaginary museum: essays of two decades . Carcanet New Press. Retrieved 4 June 2012. 
^ Foreword to Menashe's Collected Poems, 1986.
