Cat's Cradle is the fourth novel by American writer Kurt Vonnegut, first published in 1963. It explores issues of science, technology, and religion, satirizing the arms race and many other targets along the way. After turning down his original thesis, in 1971 the University of Chicago awarded Vonnegut his Master's degree in anthropology for Cat's Cradle. The title of the book derives from the string game "cat's cradle. " Early in the book it is learned that Felix Hoenikker (a fictional co-inventor of the atom bomb) was playing cat's cradle when the bomb was dropped, and the game is later referenced by his son, Newton Hoenikker.
e
The Republic of San Lorenzo is a fictional country where much of the book's second half takes place.
San Lorenzo is a tiny, rocky island nation located in the Caribbean Sea , positioned in the relative vicinity of Puerto Rico . San Lorenzo has only one city, its seaside capital of Bolivar. The country's form of government is a dictatorship , under the rule of ailing president "Papa" Monzano, who is a staunch ally of the United States and a fierce opponent of communism . No legislature exists. The infrastructure of San Lorenzo is described as being dilapidated, consisting of worn buildings, dirt roads, an impoverished populace, and having only one automobile taxi running in the entire country.
The language of San Lorenzo is a fictitious English-based creole language that is referred to as "the San Lorenzan dialect." The San Lorenzan national anthem is based on the tune of Home on the Range . Its flag consists of a U.S. Marine Corps corporal's chevrons on a blue field (presumably the flag was updated, since in the 1920s Marine Corps rank insignia did not include crossed rifles). Its currency is named corporals, at a rate of two corporals for every United States dollar ; both the flag and the monetary unit are named after U.S. Marine Corporal Earl McCabe, who deserted his company while stationed at Port-au-Prince during the American occupation in 1922, and in transit to Miami, was shipwrecked on San Lorenzo. McCabe, along with accomplice Lionel Boyd Johnson from Tobago , would together throw out the island's governing sugar company, and after a period of anarchy , proclaimed a republic.
San Lorenzo also has its own native religion, Bokononism , a religion based on enjoying life through its untruths. Bokononism, founded by McCabe's accomplice Boyd Johnson (pronounced "Bokonon" in San Lorenzan dialect), however, is outlawed - an idea Bokonon himself conceived for the purpose of spreading the religion and making the residents of the island happier. Bokononists are liable to be punished by being impaled on a hook, but Bokononism privately remains the dominant religion of nearly everyone on the island, including the leaders who outlaw it.
Officially, San Lorenzo is a Christian nation. However, both Catholicism and Protestantism are illegal. This leads to a rather haphazard issuing of last rites .
Characters
'The narrator' is a writer named John, also known as Jonah, who describes the events in the book with humorous and sarcastic detail. While writing a book on the Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , he becomes involved with the Hoenikker children. He begins the book by stating "Call me Jonah ", alluding to the first line of Herman Melville's Moby-Dick . In a way, John and Ishmael , the narrator for Moby-Dick, share the same traits as simultaneously a protagonist and a minor character.
Felix Hoenikker is the "Father of the Atom Bomb." Felix Hoenikker was proclaimed one of the smartest scientists on Earth. An eccentric and emotionless man, he is depicted as amoral and apathetic towards anything other than his research. He needed only something to keep him busy, such as in his role as one of the " Fathers of the Atomic Bomb ", and in his creation of "ice-nine," a potentially catastrophic substance with the capability to destroy all life on Earth, but which he saw merely as a mental puzzle (a Marine general suggested developing a substance that could solidify mud so soldiers could run across it more easily). During experiments with "ice nine", Felix takes a nap in his rocking chair and dies. It is the narrator's quest for biographical details about Hoenikker that provides both the background and the connecting thread between the various subsections of the story.
Dr. Asa Breed is Felix Hoenikker's supervisor. He takes the narrator, John, around Illium and to the General Forge and Foundry Company where the late Felix worked. Later in the tour, Dr. Breed becomes upset with John for "misunderstanding what a scientist is, what a scientist does." [4]
Newton "Newt" Hoenikker: The midget son of famed scientist Felix Hoenikker, and a painter. He is the brother of both Frank and Angela Hoenikker. His main hobby is painting minimalist abstract works. He briefly had an affair with a Russian midget dancer named Zinka, who turned out to be a KGB agent sent to steal ice-nine for the Soviet Union.
Emily Hoenikker is Felix Hoenikker's beautiful wife, who died giving birth to Newt Hoenniker. According to Dr. Asa Breed, the complications at Newt's birth were the result of a pelvic injury she sustained in a car accident some time before. Breed was a lover of Emily before she got married to Felix.
Franklin "Frank" Hoenikker is Felix Hoenikker's son, and Major General of San Lorenzo. He is the brother of Newt and Angela Hoenikker. He is an utterly technically minded person who is unable to make decisions except for giving technical advice. His main hobby is building models.
Angela Hoenikker Conners is Felix Hoenikker's daughter and a clarinetist. She is the sister of Frank and Newt Hoenikker, and is married to Harrison C. Conners. In contrast to her midget brother, Angela is unusually tall for a woman. She used to take care of her father after her mother's death, and also she's acting as a kind of mother figure to Newt. She and her brothers all have samples of ice-nine, which they found along with their father's body, dead in his chair. She dies when she blows on a clarinet contaminated with Ice-Nine.
Bokonon co-founded San Lorenzo (along with Earl McCabe) and created the religion of Bokononism, which he asked McCabe to outlaw. He was born as Lionel Boyd Johnson.
Earl McCabe co-founded San Lorenzo and is a marine deserter who ruled San Lorenzo for many years.
"Papa" Monzano is the ailing dictator of San Lorenzo. He appoints Frank Hoenikker as his successor, and then commits suicide with a piece of Ice-Nine. He is the adopted father of Mona Monzano.
Mona Aamons Monzano is the adopted daughter of "Papa" Monzano, to integrate different races into the harshness of his rule. She is considered "the only beautiful woman on San Lorenzo." She agrees to marry John, but commits suicide with Ice-Nine.
Julian Castle is the multi-millionaire ex-owner of Castle Sugar Cooperation, whom John travels to San Lorenzo to interview. He abandoned his business ventures to set up and operate a humanitarian hospital in the jungle of San Lorenzo.
H. Lowe Crosby is a bicycle manufacturer John meets on a plane to San Lorenzo. His main goal is to move his factory to San Lorenzo, so he can run it with cheap labor.
Hazel Crosby is the wife of H. Lowe Crosby, who asks all the Hoosiers she meets around the globe to call her "Mom."
Philip Castle is the son of Julian Castle, and the operator of the hotel Casa Mona on the island on San Lorenzo. He also writes a history of San Lorenzo that the narrator reads on his flight to the island. Bokonon taught both him and Mona when they were young. Through index reading of Castle's book, Claire Minton figures out that he's a homosexual.
Horlick Minton is the new American ambassador to San Lorenzo, whom John meets on a plane. He was blacklisted as a Communist sympathizer during the McCarthy era.
Claire Minton is the wife of the new American ambassador to San Lorenzo, and is an index writer.
Terms introduced in the novel
The religion of the people of San Lorenzo, called Bokononism, encompasses concepts unique to the novel, with San Lorenzan names such as:
karass - A group of people linked in a cosmically significant manner, even when superficial linkages are not evident.
duprass - a karass of only two people, who almost always die within a week of each other. The typical example is a loving couple who work together for a great purpose.
granfalloon - a false karass; i.e., a group of people who imagine they have a connection that does not really exist. An example is "Hoosiers"; Hoosiers are people from Indiana, and Hoosiers have no true spiritual destiny in common, so really share little more than a name.
wampeter - the central theme or purpose of a karass. Each karass has two wampeters, one waxing and one waning.
foma - harmless untruths
wrang-wrang - Someone who steers a Bokononist away from their line of perception. For example the narrator of the book is steered away from Nihilism when his Nihilist house sitter kills his cat and leaves his apartment in disrepair.
kan-kan - An object or item that brings a person into their karass. The narrator states in the book that his kan-kan was the book he wrote about the Hiroshima bombing.
sinookas - The intertwining "tendrils" of people's lives.
vin-dit - a sudden shove in the direction of Bokononism
saroon - to acquiesce to a vin-dit
stuppa - a fogbound child (i.e. an idiot)
duffle - the destiny of thousands of people placed on one "stuppa"
sin-wat - a person who wants all of somebody's love for themself
pool-pah - shit storm, but in some contexts: wrath of God
Busy, busy, busy - words Bokononists whisper when they think about how complicated and unpredictable the machinery of life really is
Now I will destroy the whole world - last words of a Bokononist before committing suicide
boko-maru - the supreme act of worship of the Bokononists, which is an intimate act consisting of prolonged physical contact between the naked soles of the feet of two persons
zah-mah-ki-bo - Inevitable destiny
Borasisi and Pabu, the Sun and Moon; the binary trans-Neptunian object 66652 Borasisi and its moon 66652 Borasisi I Pabu now bear their names. †
Borasisi, the Sun, held Pabu, the Moon, in his arms and hoped that Pabu would bear him a fiery child. But poor Pabu gave birth to children that were cold, that did not burn...Then poor Pabu herself was cast away, and she went to live with her favorite child, which was Earth.
References or allusions
Irving Langmuir came up with the idea of ice-nine as a way to entertain H.G. Wells who visited Schenectady in the 1930s. [5]
The town of Ilium alludes to the town of Troy, NY (Ilium being the Latinized form of Troy's Greek name, Ἴλιον [Ilion]). However, it is largely based on Schenectady, NY, where Vonnegut worked as a publicity man for General Electric after World War II. The locale appears in many of Vonnegut's works, as in God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater as the hometown of Kilgore Trout .
The rock band the Grateful Dead set up a publishing company called Ice Nine (in tribute to Vonnegut's story). [6]
Guitarist Joe Satriani 's 1987 album Surfing with the Alien contains an instrumental track titled "Ice 9".
The 70's Southern California rock band Ambrosia included "Nice, Nice, Very Nice" on their eponymous debut album, setting music to the words of Bokonon's 53rd Calypso. Vonnegut gets a songwriter's credit on the album, which peaked on the US charts at #22 in 1975.
The song "No More Mud" from the Chris Mars album 75% Less Fat makes several references to both ice-nine and other elements from the book.
Musician Susumu Hirasawa named a guitar of his design "ICE-9"; he also released an album, named ICE-9 , that features heavy use of the guitar and has songs with titles such as A Pool in the Ruins and Nice Nice Very Nice.
A metalcore band based in Boston, Massachusetts is named Ice Nine Kills .
Another band named Bokomara (the spelling of Boko-maru used in the Czech translation of the book) was founded in the mid-eighties in Brno, Czechoslovakia and is still active. [7]
Reception
Theodore Sturgeon praised Cat's Cradle, describing its storyline as "appalling, hilarious, shocking, and infuriating," and concluded that "this is an annoying book and you must read it. And you better take it lightly, because if you don't you'll go off weeping and shoot yourself." [8]
Awards and nominations
Cat's Cradle was nominated for a Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1964.
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
The book has been optioned by Leonardo DiCaprio 's production company, Appian Way Productions . James V. Hart , screenwriter for the film Contact and his son Jake Hart have been linked to the developing script. [9]
A calypso musical adaptation was presented by the Untitled Theater Company #61 in New York in 2008. [10]
Vonnegut collaborated with US composer Dave Soldier for a CD titled Ice-9 Ballads, featuring nine songs with lyrics taken from Cat's Cradle. Vonnegut narrated his lyrics to Soldier's music. [11]
A straight theatrical adaptation of the book was presented in Washington, DC in August and September 2010 by Longacre Lea Productions.
