Number the Stars is a work of historical fiction about the escape of a Jewish family from Copenhagen during Occupation of Denmark during the Second World War because of the Holocaust by award-winning author Lois Lowry. The story centers around ten-year-old Annemarie Johansen, who lived in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1943 and was caught up in the events surrounding the rescue of the Danish Jews. She risks her life to help her best friend, Ellen Rosen, by pretending that Ellen is Annemarie's older sister. Annemarie's older sister had died earlier in the war as a result of her work with the Danish Resistance. The story's title is taken from a reference to Psalm 147, in which the writer of the book relates that God has numbered all the stars in the universe. It is meant to tie into the Star of David, specifically to Ellen's necklace, which is symbolic to the story. The novel was awarded the Newbery Medal in 1990 as the "most distinguished contribution to American literature for children". Lois Lowry travelled to Copenhagen to do research and interviews for the book. She took the photo of the girl used for the cover of many editions of the book herself (shown in infobox here).
Pages
138 total number of pages including about the author and afterword
Number the Stars is a work of historical fiction by Newbery Award award-winning author Lois Lowry . It is about the escape of a Jewish family from Copenhagen during Occupation of Denmark on Second World War because of the Holocaust .
The story centers around ten-year-old Annemarie Johansen, who lived in Copenhagen , Denmark , in 1943 and was caught up in the events surrounding the rescue of the Danish Jews . She risks her life to help her best friend, Ellen Rosen, by pretending that Ellen is Annemarie's late older sister, who had died earlier in the war as a result of her work with the Danish Resistance . The story's title is taken from a reference to Psalm 147 , in which the writer of the book relates that God has numbered all the stars in the universe. This reference is meant to tie into the Star of David , specifically to Ellen's necklace, which is symbolic to the story.
The novel was awarded the Newbery Medal in 1990 [1] as the "most distinguished contribution to American literature for children". [2] Lois Lowry traveled to Copenhagen to do research and interviews for the book. She herself took the photo of the girl used for the cover (shown in infobox here). That cover was used on many editions of the book. [3]
Plot
The story opens as two Nazi soldiers stop Annemarie Johansen and her friend Ellen Rosen and ask them questions on the streets of Copenhagen.
Peter Neilsen, a man working in the Danish Resistance and Lise's fiance, visits Annemarie and her family and tells them that the Germans have started closing Jewish stores. The next day, Ellen and her parents go to the synagogue for a Jewish holiday, but find out that the Nazis have demanded lists of the Danish Jews. They will use them to arrest and relocate the entire Jewish population. Peter takes Mr. and Mrs Rosen with him into hiding, and Ellen Rosen (disguised as Lise) comes to live with the Johansen.
Later that night the Nazis come to the Johansens's apartment to search for the Rosens after failing to find the Rosen family in their apartment. While the Nazi soldiers are occupied with searching, Annemarie secretly rips the Star of David necklace off Ellen to conceal her Jewish identity. The Nazi soldiers become suspicious because Annemarie and Kirsti have blond hair, but Ellen has dark brown hair. Mr. Johansen retrieves baby photos of his three daughters, with their names listed, which clearly show that Lise's hair was similar to Ellen's when she was a baby. Then the soldiers leave.
After the Nazis leave, Mr. Johansen calls his brother-in-law, Henrik, and makes encoding arrangements to bring Ellen to him. Mrs. Johansen tells the girls that their Great-aunt Birte has died and there will be a funeral . However, Annemarie knows that Great-aunt Birte does not exist, and confronts Uncle Henrik. He tells her that she is right, and explains that it is easier to be brave when you don't know the full truth. This is followed by a brief flashback to September 29, 1943, which establishes the background to the rescue of the Danish Jews. Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz , an attache for Nazi Germany, contacts Danish social democrat Hans Hedtoft and notifies him of the intended deportation. Hedtoft, in turn, warns the head of the Jewish community C.B. Henriques and the acting chief rabbi Marcus Melchior , who spreads the warning.
Returning to the main plot, a group of Nazi soldiers arrive and disrupt the funeral, and Ellen's parents arrive shortly after. A soldier asks Annemarie's mother to open the casket. She told the soldier she would love to do so, since country doctors were not reliable, but the doctor told them that Great-aunt Birte had died from typhus , and opening the casket would spread the germs. The soldier slaps her and leaves in frustration. Peter reads the beginning of Psalm 147 to the group from the Bible, recounting the Lord God numbering the stars. Annemarie thinks that it is impossible to number the stars in the sky, and that the world is cold and very cruel like the sky or the ocean. Mrs. Rosen is scared of both.
Peter opens the casket and distributes warm clothing and blankets concealed inside it to the Jewish families who then depart, splitting up to attract less attention. Annemarie says goodbye to Ellen and her mother (who were among those attending the funeral). In the morning, Annemarie spots her mother in the distance, crawling because she broke her ankle. When she goes, she sees a package, important to the Resistance , that Mr. Rosen accidentally dropped when he tripped on a flight of stairs. Mrs. Johansen, knowing the importance of the package, tells Annemarie to fill a basket with food and the packet, and run as fast as she can. Annemarie runs off onto a wooded path towards her uncle's boat.
Along the path, she is stopped by Nazi soldiers with dogs. When they ask what she is doing out so early in the morning, she lies on stating that she is delivering lunch to her uncle. The soldiers don't believe her and one of them grabs at the basket. The soldiers eventually let her go, and Annemarie makes it to the boat. She is able to give Uncle Henrik an envelope that contains a handkerchief. The Nazi dogs who go onto the boat sniff the handkerchief and are then unable to smell Uncle Henrik's hidden "cargo" — the Jewish people who he's smuggling to safety.
Uncle Henrik returns to Denmark later that evening and explains to Annemarie that many Jewish people, including the Rosen's, were hiding in his boat. He also explains that the handkerchief in her package had a scent of rabbit blood to attract the dogs, and it contained cocaine. Several revelations are made: Peter was captured and executed by the Germans.
Two years later, the war ends, and all of Denmark celebrates. The Jews who were forced to leave Denmark return and find that their friends and neighbors have kept up their apartments in anticipation of their return. Annemarie finds out that Lise died, not as an accident, but as the Nazis intentionally hit her with a car. Ellen does not return to the story.
