Where Rainbows End is Irish writer Cecelia Ahern's second novel, published in 2004. It was titled Love, Rosie or Rosie Dunne in the US. The entire novel is written in epistolary structure in the form of letters, emails, instant messages, newspaper articles, etc. The book also reached number 1 in Ireland and the UK, and won the German CORINE Award in 2005.
Synopsis
Where rainbows end is a story told through letters, emails and instant messaging about the ever changing relationship between the two main characters Rosie Dunne and Alex Stewart. Rosie and Alex are close friends from childhood but one day they are suddenly separated when Alex and his family move from Dublin to Boston. The book guides us through their relationship as it continues to change due to distance, new relationships and circumstances which seem determined to keep them apart. One question remains throughout the book, were they always meant to be more than friends and will they risk everything including their friendship on love?
This section requires expansion .
Characters
Rosie Dunne - Rosie is one of the main characters who lives in Dublin with her daughter Katie and has always dreamed of working in a hotel. The book follows her relationship with best friend Alex as distance and circumstances are forever testing their friendship. Rosie begins to question whether she was always meant to be more than friends with Alex and these feelings soon begin to take effect on their friendship.
Alex Stewart - Alex is the other main character of the book, originally from Dublin where he grew up with Rosie, his family move to Boston where Alex eventually becomes a surgeon. Alex gets married and has a son called Josh but has his heart always really belonged to Rosie?
Phil Stewart- Phil is one of the minor characters of the book and is Alex's brother. The two often communicate via email and Phil is always giving Alex advice about love and his friendship with Rosie.
Sally- Sally meets Alex in Boston and the pair fall in love and get married and have a son together called Josh. Soon there relationship begins having problems, could Alex's feelings for Rosie be the cause of this?
Greg - Greg is a minor character in the book who marries Rosie. It soon becomes apparent that Greg is not right for Rosie and he is unfaithful to her.
Katie - Rosie falls pregnant with Katie after her prom at which she sleeps with Brian. Katie has a best friend in the book called Toby and their relationship mirrors the relationship that Alex and Rosie had as children too. As she gets older her relationship with Toby changes and teaches Rosie about her real feelings for Alex.
Toby- Toby is Katie's best friend and their relationship is very similar to the relationship Alex and Rosie had as children. Toby and Katie lose touch and meet after several years where they realize they were always meant to be more than friends.
Brian - Brian is Katie's dad who comes back in to her life mid way through the book. He went to school with Rosie and Alex.
Ruby - Ruby is best friends with Rosie after they meet working in an office for a stationary company. Ruby is always on hand to offer Rosie advice when she is unsure of her feelings in life and love.
This section requires expansion .
