The Seventh Scroll is a novel by author Wilbur Smith first published in 1995. It is part of the 'Egyptian' series of novels by Smith and follows the exploits of the adventurer Nicholas Quenton-Harper and Dr. Royan Al Simma. The tomb of Tanus which is the focus of the book refers to another novel by the author, River God.
Plot summary
This book is set in the present day and follows the exploits of adventurer Nicholas Quenton-Harper and his love interest, the beautiful Dr. Royan Al Simma as they try and uncover the tomb of Tanus as described in River God. Wilbur Smith makes references to himself in the book, parodying the conventions of violence and sex often seen in his work.
Duraid Al Simma and his wife Royan decipher the seventh scroll, which Taita had placed in the tomb of Lostris. Unfortunately, before they could proceed further, they are attacked and their work is stolen. Duraid is brutally murdered, but Royan manages to escape into the night, for help. She narrowly escapes death for a second time. Royan heads to England and there convinces an old friend of Duraid, Nicholas, of the existence of the fabulous treasure that is in the tomb of Pharaoh Mamose. During her stay in England she narrowly escapes death for a third time as she and her mother drive back home. Struck with confusion, fear and insecurity, she entrust herself into Nicholas' companionship. Together they travel to Ethiopia following clues laid out by Taita.
As the pair journey along together, they grow fond of each other's company, with heart-felt love and romance.
They find the location of the tomb, but are then attacked by the Pegasus group, which was also behind earlier attempts on Royan's life. Once again Royan and Nicholas' work are stolen.
It is revealed that the Pegasus group is owned by Herr von Schiller, a ruthless German collector. With the help of his right hand man Jake Helm, Colonel Nogo, and Duraid's former assistants under his command, he acquires a strong force that are willing to go to extreme lengths for his sake.
Colonel Nogo was put in charge of keeping Royan and Nicholas out of their way and Duraid's assistant was in charge of exploiting the works Nicholas and Royan discovered, while Jake Helm provided them with Pegasus' facilities.
Meanwhile, with the help of an old friend of Nicholas, Mek Nimmur (leader of a notorious force of Christian gangs, 'Shuftas'), Nicholas and Royan sneak back into Ethiopia for the second time, but this time illegally and with equipment to search for the treasure. Accompanying them is an old fisherman who has knowledge of building dams. He is employed under Nicholas' demand, to help in their quest.
With spies of Herr Von Schiller's gloating around Nicholas and Royans' premises, the question of how Nicholas and Royan manage to find the tomb and escape from von Schiller forms the rest of the novel.
References
^ In Egypt, A Cache of Buried Pleasure Jacomb, Brian. The Washington Post (1974-Current file) [Washington, D.C] 13 Apr 1995: C3.
