One of Those Hideous Books Where the Mother Dies is a novel in verse by Sonya Sones. It is a young adult novel that tells the story of Ruby Milliken who is forced to go live with her famous movie star father, Whip Logan, in Los Angeles when her mother dies. Ruby is taken away from her friends and family, all of which she loves, and is forced to cope in the fake and artificial world of Hollywood. The novel is told mostly in blank verse with periodic interruptions of emails and letters Ruby exchanges with her friends. She soon finds herself torn between her old life and her new life.
1-4169-0788-2
One of Those Hideous Books Where the Mother Dies ( 2004 ) is a novel in verse by Sonya Sones . It is a young adult novel that tells the story of Ruby Milliken who is forced to go live with her famous movie star father, Whip Logan, in Los Angeles when her mother dies. Ruby is taken away from her friends and family, all of which she loves, and is forced to cope in the fake and artificial world of Hollywood . The novel is told mostly in blank verse with periodic interruptions of emails and letters Ruby exchanges with her friends. She soon finds herself torn between her old life and her new life.
Plot
Fifteen year-old Ruby reluctantly moves from Boston to Los Angeles after her mother passes away from cancer. She explains that her father, famous actor Whip Logan, divorced her mother before she was even born and the only time she ever saw him was in movies. Another reason why Ruby is sad about leaving is her boyfriend Ray, whom she's in love with. Whip is extremely eager towards Ruby's arrival and insists on spending as much time with her as possible; making her resent the fact that he was never involved in her life before her mother's death. She starts her new high school, but feels out of place with the other students. She does however meet a fellow sophomore named Colette who's mother is also a celebrity. As she and Ray plan to see each other over thanksgiving, Ruby decides she wants to lose her virginity to him while he visits. As time goes by, Ruby discovers that Ray has been cheating on her with her best friend Lizzie. Whip is able to comfort her and eventually make her feel better. Ruby learns that while she was little, her aunt would arrange secret visit between her and Whip, and that her mother didn't want him involved in her life because he was gay . The book ends with Ruby making up with Lizzie after she and Ray break up,and winning a leading part in Pygmalion in school along with her new crush Wyatt.
External links
The author's official website http://www.sonyasones.com/
This article about a young adult novel of the 2000s is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
