For the song by Prince, see Just as Long as We're Together. Just as Long as We’re Together {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=200px|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}1st editionAuthor(s) Judy BlumeCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) Young adult novelPublisher Orchard BooksPublication date 1987Media type PrintPages 296 ppISBN 1-55736-046-4OCLC Number 16900279Followed by Here's to You, Rachel Robinson 	 Just as Long as We're Together is a young adult novel written by Judy Blume and published in 1987. The novel is narrated by Stephanie 'Steph' Hirsch, who has several changes in her life happening at the same time. She is turning thirteen, her family has just moved, she is starting middle school, her parents are separating, she gains ten pounds over the holidays, she starts menstruating and becoming interested in boys, and her lifelong friendship with the overachieving Rachel Robinson (the later protagonist of Here's to You, Rachel Robinson) is threatened when new girl Alison Monceau moves to town. Stephanie really likes Alison and feels that Rachel is threatened when the twosome becomes a threesome. Will this friendship be saved?
Here's to You, Rachel Robinson
Just as Long as We're Together is a young adult novel written by Judy Blume and published in 1987 .
The novel is narrated by Stephanie 'Steph' Hirsch, who has several changes in her life happening at the same time. She is turning thirteen, her family has just moved, she is starting middle school, her parents are separating, she gains ten pounds over the holidays, she starts menstruating and becoming interested in boys, and her lifelong friendship with the overachieving Rachel Robinson (the later protagonist of Here's to You, Rachel Robinson ) is threatened when new girl Alison Monceau moves to town. Stephanie really likes Alison and feels that Rachel is threatened when the twosome becomes a threesome. Will this friendship be saved? Will Stephanie's parents ever get back together?
Allusions and references to other works
The novel's title is a reference from the popular 1927 song " Side by Side " by Gus Kahn and Harry M. Woods ; which Stephanie learned at summer camp and teaches her friends, which she refers her favorite lines in the song:
"Through all kinds of weather
What if the sky should fall
Just as long as we're together
It doesn't matter at all"
