PS, I Love You is Irish writer Cecelia Ahern's first novel, published in 2004. The book reached #1 bestseller status in Ireland (for 19 weeks), the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany, and the Netherlands.
Ciara – Holly's younger sister
Mathew – Ciara's Australian boyfriend
Declan – Holly's younger brother
Leo – Holly's hair stylist
Barbara – A travel agent
Chris Feeney – Holly's boss
Alice Goodyear – Holly's colleague
Charlie – A bartender
Reception
Despite the hype and commercial success, (Irish political figure Bertie Ahern 's daughter) Cecilia Ahern's debut novel drew mixed-to-negative reception. Radio Telefís Éireann (RTÉ) gave it three out of five stars, stating that Ahern's book is "funny and emotional" but criticised his impression that the message of the book was one of getting over the death of a loved one by "getting drunk and shopping". [1] The Guardian wrote a satirical review in which Ahern's shallow characterisation and melodramatic plot were lampooned. [2] The Clare County library called the book "overhyped", "predictable" and "full of stock characters", but lastly an "easy read... and a nice holiday read". [3] Amazon.co.uk calls it "at times repetitive and her delivery is occasionally amateurish [but] Ahern deserves credit for a spirited first effort". [4]
Main article: P.S. I Love You (film)
A film adaptation of the book was released in 2007 with Hilary Swank as Holly, and Gerard Butler as her husband, Gerry. James Marsters plays John McCarthy and Jeffrey Dean Morgan plays William Gallagher. The cast included Kathy Bates , Harry Connick, Jr. , Gina Gershon and Lisa Kudrow . Filming began in October 2006 in New York City and Ireland, and the movie was released on 21 December 2007 in the United States (see below for other release information). [5]
Although box office numbers were high, critics gave the film negative reviews. [6] [7]
Differences between novel and film adaptation
The major difference between the novel and its film adaptation is that, in the novel, the main characters Holly and Gerry Kennedy are Irish. In the film, only Gerry is Irish, Holly and her family are Irish Americans, and the two live in New York. Also in the novel, Holly has numerous siblings, but in the film she has one. The film adds a character called William, played by Jeffrey Dean Morgan . Another change is that in the books, the letters arrive all in a package together and Holly is expected to open them once a month. In the movie, the letters are delivered by mail. The film remains fairly true to the novel, and all of Gerry's letters are virtually unchanged.
