Cloudsplitter is a 1998 historical novel by Russell Banks relating the story of abolitionist John Brown. The novel is narrated as a retrospective by John Brown's son, Owen Brown, from his hermitage in the San Gabriel Mountains of California. His reminiscences are triggered by the reception of an invitation from a Miss Mayo, assistant to Oswald Garrison Villard, then researching his book John Brown: A Biography Fifty Years After (Boston, 1910).
Major themes
Banks raises a number of thematic questions during the lengthy portrayal of his subject matter. Notable among them are:
How emotional attachment and hermetic exile provide for an unreliable narration .
The moral consequences of Radicalism : violent vs. non-violent protest .
The fine line between sanity and religious fanaticism : "...the Lord speaks to me."
How strong familial attachment is itself a form of slavery .
Loss of innocence.
The narrative style employed by Banks is introspective and apologetic where each character's moral compass is seen as through the microscope of Owen Brown's telling; detailed and larger than life. Bank's prose uses language that registers on the psyche : evoking the conviction that redemption can be gained by an Augustinian confession . And yet the reader is goaded into sympathy with these characters by their sheer persistence in the face of seemingly insurmountable daily travails - evoking the innocence of a new-born country.
Literary license
Banks takes great license with some of the historical figures in his narrative and very clearly states in his preface that his book is a work of fiction and not to be substituted for a work of biography or history. Perhaps most significant is the later life of Owen Brown; the historical Owen Brown died in 1889 at the age of 64 while his literary counterpart lives for decades longer.
The novel was reviewed positively in a number of places—
"Russell Banks has created in Cloudsplitter an immediate landmark in American fiction" BookPage [1]
"Masterly... a furious, sprawling drama that commands attention like thunder heard from just over the horizon." Time Magazine (quoted in:) [2]
"...a novel of near-biblical proportions about the abolitionist freedom fighter John Brown, is shaped like an explosive with an exceedingly long and winding fuse." New York Times [3]
In 2011, The Guardian 's Tom Cox selected Cloudsplitter as one of his "overlooked classics of American literature". [4]
Awards and nominations
