All the President's Men is a 1974 non-fiction book by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, two of the journalists investigating the first Watergate break-in and ensuing scandal for The Washington Post. The book chronicles the investigative reporting of Woodward and Bernstein from Woodward's initial report on the Watergate break-in through the resignations of H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, and the revelation of the Nixon tapes by Alexander Butterfield in 1973. It relates the events behind the major stories the duo wrote for the Post, naming some sources who had previously refused to be identified for their initial articles, notably Hugh Sloan. It also gives detailed accounts of Woodward's secret meetings with his source Deep Throat whose identity was kept hidden for over 30 years. Gene Roberts, the former executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer and former managing editor of The New York Times, has called the work of Woodward and Bernstein "maybe the single greatest reporting effort of all time. " A film adaptation, produced by Robert Redford and starring Redford and Dustin Hoffman as Woodward and Bernstein, respectively, was released in 1976. That same year, a sequel to the book, The Final Days, was published, which chronicled the last months of Nixon's Presidency, starting around the time that their previous book ended.
LC Class
E860 .B47
All the President's Men is a 1974 non-fiction book by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward , two of the journalists investigating the first Watergate break-in and ensuing scandal for The Washington Post . The book chronicles the investigative reporting of Woodward and Bernstein from Woodward's initial report on the Watergate break-in through the resignations of H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman , and the revelation of the Nixon tapes by Alexander Butterfield in 1973. It relates the events behind the major stories the duo wrote for the Post, naming some sources who had previously refused to be identified for their initial articles, notably Hugh Sloan . It also gives detailed accounts of Woodward's secret meetings with his source Deep Throat whose identity was kept hidden for over 30 years. [1] Gene Roberts , the former executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer and former managing editor of The New York Times , has called the work of Woodward and Bernstein "maybe the single greatest reporting effort of all time." [2]
A film adaptation , produced by Robert Redford and starring Redford and Dustin Hoffman as Woodward and Bernstein, respectively, was released in 1976. That same year, a sequel to the book, The Final Days , was published, which chronicled the last months of Nixon 's Presidency, starting around the time that their previous book ended.
Contents
