Night of January 16th is a play written by Ayn Rand, inspired by the death of the "Match King", Ivar Kreuger. First produced under a different name in 1934, it takes place entirely in a court room and is centered on a murder trial. It was a success on Broadway during the 1935-36 season, followed by several regional productions. A movie loosely based on the play was released in 1941. Rand disagreed with a number of changes made by the Broadway producer and in amateur versions of the play, so in 1968 she re-edited the script for publication as the "definitive" version. The play deals with issues of a man's ability to regard oneself as important and exist in a society where moral decay is ever prevalent. It also deals with issues of love, loyalty and betrayal. One unusual feature of the play is that members of the audience are picked to take on the role of jury members each night. The play does not directly portray the events; instead the "jury" must rely on character testimony and vote on whether the "defendant" is guilty or not guilty. The play has different endings depending on the verdict.
History
Rand's inspiration for the play came primarily from two sources. One was seeing a performance of The Trial of Mary Dugan , a melodrama about a showgirl on trial for killing her wealthy lover. This play gave Rand the idea to write a drama about a trial, but one where the ending would not be fixed. The other source was news reports about the suicide of Ivar Kreuger , a Swedish businessman known as the "Match King" because of monopolies on match production he had negotiated with various governments. When his business empire became financially unstable, he shot himself amid accusations of shady and possibly illegal financial deals. From this incident Rand got the idea to make the victim a businessman of great ambition and dubious character, who could have been murdered for more than one reason. [1]
Rand wrote the play in 1933 under the title Penthouse Legend. [2] Her agent submitted it to several theatrical producers in New York, but it was repeatedly rejected. Rand finally accepted an offer from E.E. Clive to produce the play at the Hollywood Playhouse in Los Angeles. It opened in October 1934 under the title Woman on Trial. She later described the production as "badly handicapped by lack of funds" and "competent, but somewhat unexciting." However, it was modestly successful and got some positive reviews. [3]
Producer Al Woods brought the play to Broadway in 1935.
At the end of the run in Los Angeles, producer Al Woods offered to put the play on Broadway, provided that he could make changes to it. Rand reluctantly agreed to his terms. [4] One of the changes was to the title, which became Night of January 16th. Rand disliked this title, but when the play became a success she decided the name was too famous to change again. [5]
Rand arrived in New York at the beginning of December 1934, in anticipation of the new production opening in January. However, the financing for the play fell through, delaying the production for several months. [6] Woods eventually arranged new financing from theater owner Lee Shubert , [7] and he hired John Hayden to direct. [8] As work resumed on the play, Rand's relationship with Woods quickly soured as he demanded changes that she later derided as "a junk heap of worn, irrelevant melodramatic devices". [9] The changes included the creation of a new character, a gun moll , who was played by Shubert's mistress. [7] [8] Frustrated by Rand's refusal to make some of his changes, Woods hired two additional writers to make them. He gave a portion of Rand's royalties to them without her permission. Rand subsequently won an arbitration against Woods over the royalty diversion. [7] [10] Their disputes did not prevent the play from opening at Shubert's Ambassador Theatre in September 1935 and running for seven months with 283 performances. [11]
The play was first published for use by amateur theater organizations in 1936, using a version edited by Nathaniel Edward Reeid, [12] which included further changes to eliminate elements such as swearing and smoking. Rand disowned this version due to the changes. [13] In the 1960s, Rand revised the text to eliminate most of the changes and had the "final, definitive version" published in 1968 with an introduction discussing the play's history. [14] She made several dozen further small changes in language for a production of the play in 1973. [15]
Synopsis
The plot centers on a trial to decide whether Bjorn Faulkner has been murdered by his secretary, Karen Andre. Prior to the start of the play, Faulkner had been a prominent businessman who swindled millions of dollars to invest in the gold trade. In the wake of a crash, he had faced bankruptcy . On the night of January 16, Faulkner and Andre were in the penthouse at the top of the Faulkner Building in New York , when Faulkner apparently fell to his death.
The play takes place entirely in the courtroom. Although his death is the focus of the trial, Faulkner himself is never seen. Within the three acts of the play, the prosecutor (Mr. Flint) and Andre's defense attorney (Mr. Stevens) call witnesses whose testimonies build conflicting stories. [notes 2]
The first act begins with the judge asking the court clerk to call jurors from the audience. Once the jurors are seated, the prosecution argument begins. Flint explains that Andre was not just Faulkner's secretary, but also his lover. He says Faulkner jilted her in favor of marrying Nancy Lee Whitfield, and then fired Andre as his secretary, motivating her to murder him. He then calls a series of witnesses, starting with the medical examiner , who testifies that the body was so damaged by the fall that it was impossible to determine whether Faulkner was killed by the impact or already dead. An elderly night watchman and a private investigator who was hired by Nancy Lee Faulkner to follow her husband both describe the events they saw that evening. A police inspector testifies to finding a suicide note. Faulkner's very religious housekeeper disapprovingly describes the sexual relationship between Andre and Faulkner, and says she saw Andre with another man after Faulkner's marriage. Nancy Lee testifies about their courtship and marriage, portraying both as idyllic. The act ends with Andre speaking out of turn to accuse Nancy Lee of lying.
The second act continues the prosecution's case, with Flint calling John Graham Whitfield, Faulkner's father-in-law and president of Whitfield National Bank. He testifies about a large loan he made to Faulkner. In his cross-examination , defense attorney Stevens suggests the loan was used to buy Faulkner's marriage to Whitfield's daughter. After this testimony the prosecution rests, and the defense argument begins. A handwriting expert testifies about the signature on the suicide note. Faulkner's bookkeeper describes events between Andre's firing and the night of Faulkner's death, as well as related financial matters. Then Andre takes the stand in her own defense. She describes her relationship with Faulkner, as both his lover and his partner in financial fraud. She says she did not resent his marriage, because it was a business deal to secure credit from the Whitfield Bank. As she starts to explain why Faulkner would have committed suicide, she is interrupted by the arrival of Larry "Guts" Regan, an infamous gangster . He tells Andre that Faulkner is dead. Despite being on trial for Faulkner's murder, Andre is shocked by this news and faints, ending the act.
The final act continues Andre's testimony, but her attitude has changed from defiant to somber. She says that she, Faulkner and Regan had conspired to fake Faulkner's suicide so they could escape with money stolen from Whitfield. Regan, who was also in love with Andre, provided the stolen body of one of his already-dead gang associates, "Lefty" O'Toole, to throw off the building. In his cross-examination, Flint suggests she and Regan were using knowledge of past criminal activities to blackmail Faulkner. Stevens then calls Regan, who testifies that he was to meet Faulkner at a getaway plane after they left the stolen body with Andre, but Faulkner did not show up and the plane was missing. Instead, Regan encountered Whitfield, who gave him a check that Regan says was to buy his silence. Later Regan found the missing plane, burned with what he presumes is Faulkner's body inside. Flint's cross-examination offers the alternative theory that Regan put the stolen body in the plane to create doubt about Andre's guilt, and the check from Whitfield was protection money to Regan's gang. In the Broadway and amateur versions, the next witness is Roberta Van Rensslaer, an exotic dancer and wife of "Lefty" O'Toole, who believes Regan killed her husband. (This character does not appear in Rand's version of the play.) [16] Finally, Stevens recalls two witnesses, first Whitfield and then Faulkner's bookkeeper, to follow up on issues from Regan's testimony. Then the defense and prosecution give their closing arguments .
The jury is sent off to vote, while the characters repeat highlights from their testimony under a spotlight . The jury then returns to announce their verdict. One of two short alternative endings follows. If found not guilty, Andre thanks the jury. If found guilty, she says they have spared her from committing suicide. In Reeid's amateur version, after either verdict the judge berates the jurors for their bad judgment and declares that they cannot serve again. [17]
Productions
Walter Pidgeon played "Guts" Regan in the Broadway production.
The play has had several professional productions, under three different titles. It first opened at the Hollywood Playhouse in Los Angeles as Woman on Trial. Welsh actor E.E. Clive produced, and Barbara Bedford played Karen Andre. [18] The production opened in October 1934 and closed in late November 1934.
The most successful production was on Broadway under the title Night of January 16th, produced by Al Woods at the Ambassador Theatre, with John Hayden directing. Doris Nolan played the defendant. The play opened on September 16, 1935, and closed on April 4, 1936. [19] Woods then launched productions of the play in other cities, including Chicago, Los Angeles, and London. The production in London opened on September 29, 1936, with Phoebe Foster in the lead role. It closed after 22 performances. [20] A production in Montreal, Quebec opened on June 16, 1941, starring Fay Wray as Andre and Robert Wilcox as Regan. [21]
In 1972, Rand gave her approval for an Off-Broadway revival using her preferred version of the script and her original title, Penthouse Legend. Phillip and Kay Nolte Smith , a married couple who were friends with Rand, produced, and Kay also starred under a stage name. [22] It opened at the McAlpin Rooftop Theater on February 22, 1973, and closed three weeks later. [23]
Broadway cast and characters
The play's protagonist and lead female role is the defendant, Karen Andre. [24] With Rand's support, [25] Woods filled this role with an unusual choice, an actress named Doris Nolan . It was Nolan's Broadway debut, and her previous professional acting experience was a failed attempt at completing a movie scene. [26] At just 17 years old, she was being cast as a femme fatale who was presumably not a teenager. She did have one important advantage, however: Woods was her manager and got a commission from her contract. The inexperienced Nolan was nervous throughout rehearsals. When other actresses visited, she feared they were there to replace her. Her fears were not realized. [27] Although Rand later deprecated her as "not a sensational actress", [8] reviewers praised her performance. [28]
Rand actively pushed another casting choice, Walter Pidgeon in the role of gangster "Guts" Regan. Woods objected at first, but eventually gave Pidgeon the part. [8] As with Nolan, reviewers approved the choice. [29] However, Pidgeon left the production after about a month to take a role in another play, There's Wisdom in Women . [30] He was replaced by William Bakewell , over the objections of Rand, who instead recommended Morgan Conway , the actor who played the part in the Los Angeles production. [31]
Edmund Breese played District Attorney Flint in the Broadway production.
The speaking parts from the Broadway production are given below, in order by when the character first speaks:
Character
