The Grass Harp is a novel by Truman Capote published on October 1, 1951 It tells the story of an orphaned boy and two elderly ladies who observe life from a tree. They eventually leave their temporary retreat to make amends with each other and other members of society.
Play
Capote's stage adaptation of his novel, directed by Robert Lewis , opened on March 27, 1952 at Broadway 's Martin Beck Theatre , where it ran for 36 performances. The cast included Mildred Natwick as Dolly Talbo, Ruth Nelson as Verena Talbo, Jonathan Harris as Dr. Morris Ritz, Sterling Holloway as The Barber, Gertrude Flynn as The Baker's Wife, Val Dufour as The Sheriff, Jane Lawrence as The Choir Mistress, Lenka Peterson as Maude Riordan, and Alice Pearce as Miss Baby Love Dallas. [11] Music was by Virgil Thomson and scenery and costumes were by Cecil Beaton . [12]
Musical
After five previews (October 26, 1971), a Theatre 71 musical play adaptation, with a book and lyrics by Kenward Elmslie and music by Claibe Richardson , opened on November 2, 1971 at the Martin Beck Theatre, where it ran for only seven performances (November 6). The cast, directed by Ellis Rabb , choreography by Rhoda Levine , included Barbara Cook cast as Dolly Talbo, Carol Brice as Catherine Creek, Karen Morrow as evangelist Miss Baby Love, Ruth Ford as Verena Talbo, Russ Thacker as Colin Talbo, Max Showalter as Dr. Morris Ritz, John Baragrey as Judge Cool, Kelley Boa , Trudy Bordoff , Colin Duffy , Eva Grant , David Craig Moskin as Miss Baby Love's orphans, known as the "Heavenly Pride and Joy", Christine Stabile as Maude Riordan, and Harvey Vernon as Sheriff Amos Legrand. The musical previewed and opened during a major New York City Newspaper strike preventing advertising and reviews, with no advance theater party ticket sales guarantee. During the previous year, The Michigan Universiy Professional Theatre Program presented the "Grass Harp" musical with the university's music and drama departments supplying musicians and performers. Initially as an evaluation by the Broadway Producers Richard Barr , Charles Woodward , Michael Harvey [ disambiguation needed ], and Associate Producer Michael Kasden . in a development test, tryout, prior to moving the production to Broadway. Celeste Holm , a close friend of Claibe Richardson , appeared in the Michigan University Professional Program's production as "Miss Baby Love"; was replaced by Ellis Rabb with Karen Marrow for the Broadway production, because of Holm's weak voice and Celeste's age. (Celeste Holm was "forced to withdraw" which created a split with her friendship with Claibe Richardson). Orchestrations were by Jonathan Tunick and Robert Russell Bennett ; Theodore Saidenberg was musical director; musical arrangements by J (Billy) Van Planck ; dance and incidental music by John Berkman ; scenic design and lighting by James Tilton ; costumes by Nancy Potts ; production stage manager Bruce A. Hoover ; Charles Kindl Stage Manager. Richard Barr, Charles Woodward, Michael Harvey, and Michael Kasden gave the company the option of maintaining three more weeks for the productions' performance schedule, or closing after only seven performances, using the show's banked funds to produce a Broadway cast album. The musical orchestration was recorded in Cologne, Germany , with the Cologne Symphonic Orchestra ensemble. Returning to the States, the original cast was recorded in New York City, with the Painted Smiles "Grass Harp" vinyl album released a year after the musical's closing date. Because of timing, one musical number was forced off the vinyl, but added when the Painted Smiles "Grass Harp" audio CD was released. The Grass Harp album cover art was designed by Kenward Elmslie's fine artist-painter friend Joe Brainard . Claibe Richardson's Advertising Agency Art director-designer friend jim Pearsal designed the Chappell Music Publishing's sheet music design-cover art work . Pearsal's twisted chinaberry tree house design, the Chappell Music Publishing sheet music cover art, replaced the original Brainard vinyl record "Grass Harp" cover art work when the Painted Smiles audio CD was issued. Initially, criticism of the show's sound system caused problems, with Truman Capote declaring "mike it". The producers could not afford to "mike" each member of the ensemble. The Grass Harp production was the last musical presented on Broadway without mikes for the cast. The scenic designer had incorporated "burlap fabric" in the production's wing and border designs, causing the deadening of the performer's vocal projections. This poor choice of stage material in the set's design with the absence of microphones for each cast member, especially the children, was the one major technical problem for the producers. Celest Holm must be acknowledged in her power and relentless drive to push the Grass Harp musical, getting an initial performance production, and to the Broadway stage. The "Grass Harp" musical presentation rights are controlled by the Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein Organization management team in New York City. The "Grass Harp" orchestration score folio, ignored by Richardson and Elmslie when they were offered to purchase the musical's orchestration package from their music publishing organization, have been lost. Efforts to have Jonathan Tunick recreate the musical's orchestration folio have never been finalized because of financial reasons; The Richardson Estate will not agree with financing additional expenses involved with "The Grass Harp". Barbara Cook and the cast appeared on a CBS television Sunday morning talk-interview show, presenting several of the musical numbers with Claibe Richardson at the grand piano, during the musical's preview week and opening night performances. The CBS television "Grass Harp" promo interview segment can be located on the internet site "YouTube". The initial 1967 trial of the musical was performed by Trinity Square Repertory Company at the Rhode Island School of Design auditorium, in Providence, Rhode Island. Directed and staged by Adrian Hall , the cast included Barbara Baxley as Dolly Heart Talbo, Carol Brice as the black maid Catherine Creek, Carol Bruce as Verena Talbo, Elaine Stritch as the evangelist Baby Love. After the Providence show trial, Larry Fineberg optioned the property for Broadway, casting Mama Cass as the evangelist Miss Baby Love; Fineberg was unable to raise capital funds, the producing reigns were optioned by Richard Barr . Regrettably, "The Grass Harp" was Barbara Cook's last appearance in a Broadway musical's cast as a performer!
