The Gruffalo's Child by Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler is the bestselling sequel to The Gruffalo. The story is about the Gruffalo's daughter who, despite her father's stories, sets off into the woods to discover the 'big bad mouse', which is the only thing her father is afraid of. Throughout her journey, she encounters the snake, the owl, and the fox from The Gruffalo, each of whom tell her where she can find the big bad mouse. Eventually, believing she has been tricked, she gives up, saying that she doesn't believe in the 'big bad mouse'. When it finally appears, she realises it isn't big and bad as her father described. In order to avoid being eaten, the mouse invites the Gruffalo's daughter to meet the big bad mouse. It then tricks the Gruffalo's daughter by standing on a tree branch to use the moonlight to enlarge its shadow. The Gruffalo's daughter flees, believing the shadow to belong to the real 'big bad mouse'. It is a typical 'brains over brawn' plot and follows a storyline and rhyming pattern similar to its predecessor, The Gruffalo. It utilizes a Winter setting in order to make use of animal tracks in the snow, allowing the Gruffalo's daughter to encounter the other animals.
The Gruffalo's Child by Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler is the bestselling sequel to The Gruffalo .
The story is about the Gruffalo's child (a daughter) who, despite her father's warning, sets off into the 'deep dark wood' to find the 'big bad mouse', the only thing her father is afraid of.
During her winter journey, she encounters the tracks of snake, owl, and fox from The Gruffalo , each of whom she first suspects to be the 'big bad mouse,' but who in turn tell her where she can find the real 'big bad mouse'. Eventually, concluding she has been tricked by the animals (and perhaps her father), she sadly admits that she "doesn't believe in the 'big bad mouse'".
At this point, she encounters the little mouse from The Gruffalo , who previously tricked her father. The mouse invites her to meet the 'big bad mouse', which he re-creates by using moonlight to project a tremendously enlarged, fearsome shadow. Believing the shadow to belong to the real 'big bad mouse', the Gruffalo's child flees and returns to the Gruffalo cave with faith in her father restored.
The story repeats the 'brains over brawn' theme, creatures, and easily flowing rhyme scheme ( tetrameter ) of its predecessor, The Gruffalo .
