Winter Warriors, published in 1997, is a novel by British fantasy writer David Gemmell. It is the eighth entry in the Drenai series. It is also the second of three stories that feature in the anthology Drenai Tales Volume Three. The story is set several decades after Gemmell's earlier title, Quest for Lost Heroes and introduces an entirely new set of characters.
Hero in the Shadows
Winter Warriors, published in 1997, is a novel by British fantasy writer David Gemmell . It is the eighth entry in the Drenai series. It is also the second of three stories that feature in the anthology Drenai Tales Volume Three. The story is set several decades after Gemmell's earlier title, Quest for Lost Heroes and introduces an entirely new set of characters.
Plot summary
The prophecy was clear. Upon the death of three kings the world will be plunged into chaos, and all the cast-out demons of history will return to establish a new age of darkness.
Two of the kings are dead. The third, about to be born, is hunted by the Demon Riders of the Krayakin, Lords of the Undead.
All the terrifying forces of evil range against a pregnant queen at bay in a haunted forest. But she is not alone. Three warriors stand with her, the last remnants of the once proud Drenai army. Three old men, ancient heroes, discarded by the king: Nogusta the Swordsman, Kebra the Bowman, and the hulking fighter, Bison.
The fate of empires rests on their fading skills as they journey through a tormented world on a perilous quest to save the unborn king.
Nogusta - A Drenai swordmaster carrying a magic talisman which gives the owner visions of the future.
Kebra - A Drenai archer and friend of Nogusta and Bison.
Bison - A Drenai wrestler, friend of Nogusta and Kebra.
Dagorian - A young Drenai officer who gave up his ambition to become a priest following the death of his father.
Skanda - The Drenai Emperor and ruler of Ventria.
Axiana - The Ventrian Queen, carrying the child of Skanda.
Ulmenetha - Priestess, midwife and aide to Axiana.
Banelion - The White Wolf, general of the old Drenai army.
Malikada - The first general to Skanda and leader of the Ventrian army.
Kalizkan - A Ventrian Sorcerer.
Antikas Karios - The Ventrian champion and swordmaster.
Conalin - An orphan boy from Usa.
Pharis - An orphan girl from Usa.
Zani - A Ventrian investigator in the city watch.
Orendo - A renegade soldier from the old Drenai army.
