An Unkindness of Ravens is a novel by British crime-writer Ruth Rendell. It was first published in 1985, and features her popular protagonist Inspector Wexford, and is the 13th entry in the series. On American publication, it was shortlisted for the MWA Edgar Award, alongside another Rendell novel, The Tree of Hands, meaning she has the remarkable distinction of being one of only two authors in the award's history to have had two novels on the shortlist in any one year (the other being Charlotte Armstrong). Ravens was adapted as a play by theatre professor Joel Fink.
The Veiled One
An Unkindness of Ravens is a novel by British crime-writer Ruth Rendell . It was first published in 1985, and features her popular protagonist Inspector Wexford , and is the 13th entry in the series. On American publication, it was shortlisted for the MWA Edgar Award , alongside another Rendell novel, The Tree of Hands , meaning she has the remarkable distinction of being one of only two authors in the award's history to have had two novels on the shortlist in any one year (the other being Charlotte Armstrong ). Ravens was adapted as a play by theatre professor Joel Fink . [1]
Plot summary
When Wexford does a favour for his wife—to look into the disappearance of one of their neighbours' husbands—everything he finds seems to confirm his first inkling: that this is simply another case of a bored middle-aged man having run off with a younger woman. However, when Rodney Williams is found dead, and another local man is stabbed in his car, Wexford finds himself thrown into an investigation involving a militant feministic organisation known as "Arria", who have taken the raven as their symbol.
Film adaptation
In 2000, a film adaptation was made directed by J. Nathaniel Berke and starring Sean Thibodeau as Simon Reese. Other actors included Jennifer Tung as Setsuko Freeland, Brad MacDonald as Paul Aronson, Stephanie Dees as Audrey, Kipp Shiotani as Victor Takeyama and Tess Whitehurst as Nikki. Another adaptation is due to come out soon, made by Russel Friedenberg and Randy Redroad
