Vile Bodies is a 1930 novel by Evelyn Waugh satirising the Bright Young People: decadent young London society between World War I and World War II.
Title
This section possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research may be removed.
(September 2012)
The title is a literal translation of the Latin phrase "corpora vilia," the plural of "corpus vile," meaning a person or thing fit only to be the object of experimentation. The characters in the book are unwittingly at the mercy of the author's whims in the same way that, according to Biblical tradition, human lives are subject to the designs of their supernatural creator. This form of mirroring is a common literary metaphor. It has been suggested that the title could be a reference to St. Paul's Epistle to the Philippians 3:21 which, [in the Authorised Version or King James Bible of 1611], reads "Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body," but it is hard to see any way in which this interpretation relates to the plot or themes of the book. The original title was to be "Bright Young Things", which went on to be that of Stephen Fry 's 2003 film adaptation . Waugh changed it because he thought the phrase had become too clichéd. The title that he eventually settled on also appears in a comment made by the novel's narrator in reference to the characters' party-driven lifestyle: "All that succession and repetition of massed humanity... Those vile bodies...", [1] which would tend to support the translation of "corpora vilia" as the title's source.
Style
Heavily influenced by the cinema and by the disjointed style of T. S. Eliot , Vile Bodies is Waugh's second and most ostentatiously "modern" novel . [2] Fragments of dialogue and rapid scene changes are held together by the dry, almost perversely unflappable narrator. [3] Waugh claims it was the first novel in which much of the dialogue takes place on the telephone.
The book was dedicated to B. G. and D. G. ( Bryan and Diana Guinness ). [4]
Summary
Adam Fenwick-Symes is the novel's antihero; his quest to marry Nina parodies the conventions of romantic comedy , as the traditional foils and allies prove distracted and ineffectual. War looms, Adam's circle of friends disintegrates, and Adam and Nina's engagement flounders. At the book's end, we find Adam alone on an apocalyptic European battlefield. The book shifts in tone from light-hearted romp to bleak desolation (Waugh himself later attributed it to the breakdown of his first marriage halfway through the book's composition [5] ). Others have defended the novel's curious ending as a poetically just reversal of the conventions of comic romance. [6] [7]
Influence
David Bowie cited the novel as the primary influence on his composition of the song Aladdin Sane . [8]
A stage adaptation of Vile Bodies, endorsed by the Evelyn Waugh estate, will be staged at the Warwick Arts Centre in March 2012. [9] [10]
In a Ustream chat, Ezra Koenig , of Vampire Weekend , said it was one of his favourite books.
