Getting Rid of Bradley is a contemporary romance novel written by Jennifer Crusie and published in 1994. The book tells the story of Lucy Savage, a woman recently jilted by her husband Bradley, a suspected embezzler that Detective Zachary Warren wants to locate even more now that someone appears to be after Lucy.
Plot
Lucy Savage's day just keeps getting worse. Not only did her unfaithful husband stand her up in none other than divorce court, but now she's practically assaulted a cop who it turns out was saving her life from a bullet flying her direction. And to top it all off, an attempt to transform herself has left Lucy with green hair. Lucy is starting to wonder if things could get any worse.
Convinced that Bradley Porter (Lucy's Bradley) is involved in an embezzlement plot carried out by his close high school friend, John Bradley, and that the attempts on Lucy's life are related, Detective Zach Warren moves into the house with Lucy and her three "boys" (dogs named Heisenberg, Maxwell, and Einstein) keeping them on lock down until the mystery is solved.
Through a series of deadly situations, including a car bomb and an exploding bed, Zach is constantly at Lucy's side to protect her, until John Bradley shows up looking for the bonds he has embezzled. Not knowing that the police have already confiscated them, John suspects the bonds are still safely locked away in Bradley Porter's safe deposit box and comes to collect the key. Lucy successfully defends herself with a spray can of varnish straight to the intruder's eyes, in her mind ending the drama once and for all.
That is until her Bradley shows up, and he's not after money, he's after her. Zach, sensing the danger, breaks into the basement of the house, becoming Bradley's target and receiving a gun aimed at his chest. Lucy once again comes to the rescue, hitting Bradley square in the head with a baseball bat and putting a finish to her relationship with her obsessive ex-husband for good.
After that attack, Lucy consents to marrying Zack and allowing him to move in permanently with her and her (now 4) dogs.
