The Box of Delights is a children's fantasy novel by John Masefield. It is a sequel to The Midnight Folk, and was first published in 1935.
[ www.bbc.co.uk/cult/classic/box/ Website]
The BBC TV adaptation of the The Box of Delights was broadcast in six parts between 21 November and 24 December in 1984. Featuring notable British actors Patrick Troughton , Robert Stephens , Patricia Quinn, John Horsley and James Grout. It starred newcomer Devin Stanfield as Kay. An innovative mixture of live action and animation using Quantel Paintbox and chroma key effects were used to portray the adventure. The seasonal theme music was an orchestral arrangement of " The First Nowell " from the Carol Symphony by Victor Hely-Hutchinson . The series, which was directed by Renny Rye, is now considered a nostalgic yuletide classic.
Awards: The Box of Delights was nominated for five BAFTA (British Academy of Film & Television Arts) awards - for best Children's Programme, Video Cameraman, Graphics, Video Lighting and VTR Editor; and won three (for best Children's Programme, VTR Editor and Video Lighting) [1] . It also won a Royal Television Society award for Technique, for Robin Lobb and the BBC Special Effects team [2] .
The episodes:
"When the Wolves Were Running"
"Where Shall the 'Nighted Showman Go?"
"In the Darkest Cellars Underneath"
"The Spider in the Web"
"Beware of Yesterday"
"Leave Us Not Little, Nor Yet Dark"
Railway station scenes were filmed at Bewdley and Arley on the steam heritage Severn Valley Railway ; Tewkesbury became the fictional Tatchester; the bishop's children's party was done at Kinlet Hall , Shropshire (the home of Moffats Independent School, whose pupils and staff served as extras); Hereford Cathedral and its choir took centre stage in the final episode; and the exterior shots of Abner Brown's theological college were filmed at Eastnor Castle , near Ledbury , Herefordshire. [3]
During December 1986, the series was repeated on BBC1 as three 50-minute episodes. For this transmission the episodes were entitled:
"When the Wolves Were Running"
"The Spider in the Web"
"Fire and Flood"
The television version was shown by PBS in the USA for three years in the late 1980s. BBC Worldwide released the serial on DVD in 2004.
Opera
John Masefield adapted an opera libretto from his book, also incorporating elements of The Midnight Folk , which was eventually set to music in the late 1980s by British composer Robert Steadman .
