The Little Bookroom is a collection of twenty-seven stories for children by Eleanor Farjeon, published by Oxford University Press in 1955 with illustrations by Edward Ardizzone. They were selected by the author to represent the best of her work over a thirty-year period from the 1910s or 1920s. Most were in the fairy tale style. Next year Farjeon won the inaugural Hans Christian Andersen International Medal, recognising her career contribution to children's literature as a writer. She also won the annual Carnegie Medal, recognising The Little Bookroom as the year's best children's book by a British subject. The librarians judged no 1955 book suitable for the newly-established Kate Greenaway Medal for children's book illustration. A year later Ardizzone won the first-awarded Greenaway Medal for Tim All Alone (1956) which he also wrote. Oxford published a U.S. edition in 1956 with a long title, as catalogued by the national library: The Little Bookroom: Eleanor Farjeon's short stories for children, chosen by herself.
Old Surly and the Boy
Pannychis
Literary significance and reception
In England the best work of the years after the First World War was mainly in poetry, or fantasy, or poetic fantasy; in particular there was a spate of original stories in the folk-tale manner. [8] Eleanor Farjeon was above all a poet, but from the 1920s onward she effectively used poetic language and fancy in creating literary but homely fairy tales for children, as did her fellow poet, Walter de la Mare. [9] The "literary fairy tale" recreates traditional fairy tales and folktales in several respects, such as clear distinctions between good and evil, and their inevitable reward and punishment. Writing in this genre, Farjeon was one of the foremost 20th century followers of Hans Christian Andersen , [10] which makes it fitting that she was the first recipient of the Hans Christian Andersen Award in 1956. [4] Although the award recognises an author's or illustrator's whole body of work, the publication of The Little Bookroom provided an impetus for the award. Similarly, the 1955 Carnegie Medal was considered a recognition of Eleanor Farjeon's contribution to children's literature as a whole, echoing the 1947 award to Walter de la Mare for Collected Stories for Children . [11]
Publication history
Puffin Books (1977) retained the original cover and interior illustrations by Edward Ardizzone (see image).
New York Review Books published an edition in 2003 with afterword by Rumer Godden [7] ( ISBN 1590170482 ), retaining the original illustrations.
The 2004 Oxford edition used a new cover illustration. [1] [3]
