Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism is a 2003 book by Ann Coulter. Three weeks after its release more than 500,000 copies were sold.
McCarthyism
In the book, Coulter argues U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy was unfairly portrayed by the U.S. media as persecuting people for political reasons. Coulter alleges McCarthy correctly identified communist foreign spies in the United States .
In an interview with David Bowman, Coulter said that Joseph McCarthy is the deceased person she admires the most. Coulter claims in Treason that McCarthy was simply misunderstood and unappreciated, and that the Venona cables and other sources have vindicated him by showing there indeed were Soviet spies in the United States government. In continuing efforts to exculpate McCarthy, she wrote some columns attacking George Clooney 's movie Good Night, and Good Luck , about television journalist Edward R. Murrow and McCarthy. She claims McCarthyism is inaccurately portrayed as destructive.
Quotes by the author
"The portrayal of Senator Joe McCarthy as a wild-eyed demagogue destroying innocent lives is sheer liberal hobgoblinism. Liberals weren't cowering in fear during the McCarthy era. They were systematically undermining the nation's ability to defend itself while waging a bellicose campaign of lies to blacken McCarthy's name. Everything you think you know about McCarthy is a hegemonic lie. Liberals denounced McCarthy because they were afraid of getting caught, so they fought back like animals to hide their own collaboration with a regime as evil as the Nazis."
"'McCarthyism' means pointing out positions taken by liberals that are unpopular with the American people. As former President Bush said, 'Liberals do not like me talking about liberals.' The reason they sob about the dark night of fascism under McCarthy is to prevent Americans from ever noticing that liberals consistently attack their own country."
"Liberals have a preternatural gift for striking a position on the side of treason.."
References and further reading
^ Lawrence Donegan (July 7, 2003). "Blasts at liberal 'traitors' win US book war" . The Observer. Retrieved June 16, 2011. 
Coulter, Ann (2003). Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism. Three Rivers Press. ISBN   1-4000-5032-4 . 
