Without Remorse is a thriller novel published in 1993 by Tom Clancy and is a part of the Jack Ryan universe series. While not the first novel of the series to be published, it is first in plot chronology. The main setting of the book is set during the Vietnam War, in the American city of Baltimore. The book focuses on the development of one of Clancy's recurring characters, John Kelly/John Clark, while providing the character some back-story. The book serves to give a history of Kelly's life, and explains how he becomes John Clark. The book alternates between two major story arcs. In Vietnam, a group of high-ranking American prisoners of war are being kept in a special camp for interrogation by the Soviets; the Vietnamese have listed each prisoner as already dead, and so they have no hope of being ever being returned. John Kelly is enlisted by the military and CIA to plan and execute a rescue mission. Meanwhile, in the United States, a heroin ring in Baltimore uses enslaved prostitutes as drug mules. One of the girls escapes and becomes Kelly's girlfriend; she is subsequently recaptured, tortured, and killed. Kelly embarks on a mission of revenge against the gang, but must stay one step ahead of the police investigation, lead by homicide detective Emmet Ryan. In both missions, Kelly struggles with his questions about the moral use of violence and watches the human toll of war abroad and the drug epidemic at home. He also contends with traitors whose personal agendas put countless innocents at risk.
Plot summary
The prologue of the story occurs in late 1970. [Note 1] John Kelly participates in an Underwater Demolition Team 's destruction of an oil rig irreparably damaged by Hurricane Camille the previous year. While driving to pick him up after the job, Kelly's pregnant wife Patricia is killed in a car accident. Meanwhile, Robin Zacharias, an Air Force colonel and F-105 pilot, is shot down during a Wild Weasel strike over North Vietnam . The story moves to late spring in the first chapter.
Robin is captured and reported killed in action . He is transferred to a secret POW camp administered by the NVA . The purpose of the camp is to elicit aid from the Soviet Union . Each of the high-ranking prisoners possesses highly-classified technical knowledge and has already been declared dead, allowing the Soviets to interrogate them, in exchange for support in the war. Conducting the interrogation is Colonel Nikolai Yevgenievich "Kolya" Grishanov. He is a humane man who lobbies his government to have them brought to the Soviet Union in safety, but friction between the two allies is leading the North Vietnamese to decide to kill the POWs. While Zacharias is being moved to his cell, a U.S. target drone photographs him. Admiral Dutch Maxwell recognizes the pilot, who had helped develop the Strategic Air Command 's war plans. This helps Maxwell justify an operation to send Marines into North Vietnam to rescue the POWs.
Still struggling with the loss of his wife, Kelly meets a girl named Pamela Madden, who has escaped from prostitution and serving as a mule for a drug dealer named Henry Tucker. Kelly becomes romantically involved with Pam. He also befriends two doctors, Sam and Sarah Rosen, who are both professors at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine . With the help of the Rosens, Kelly helps Pam recover from her addiction to barbiturates . While bringing her into the city for treatment, Kelly becomes curious about her past. Unfortunately, Billy Grayson, Pam's old pimp , recognizes her and pursues the couple in a car chase. Billy manages to wound Kelly and kidnap Pam, eventually raping, torturing, and murdering her. When Kelly sees a picture of Pam's body, learns the brutal manner of her death, and discovers that the police have little interest in investigating the crime, he vows to take revenge on the people responsible. Kelly embarks on a rigorous exercise regimen to speed his recovery. Using the covert operations skills he learned in the military, he prepares to wage a private war with Tucker and his drug ring. Meanwhile, he is approached by Admiral Maxwell, who recruits him to spearhead a covert operation to free the POWs. Kelly had gone behind enemy lines near the camp to rescue Maxwell's son, and is the only person they know of who knows the area.
Kelly must now repeatedly shift gears between his private revenge project and training for his mission in Vietnam. Both plots require similar mindsets, call on similar skills, and provoke the same moral quandaries. After interrogating and murdering several members of Tucker's gang, he collects sufficient intelligence to go after one of the ringleaders: a man named Billy. Kelly captures Billy, while rescuing and rehabilitating another prostitute, Doris. Doris is nursed back to health with the help of the Rosens and their head nurse Sandy. Sandy and Kelly begin an awkward romance. Eventually, Doris is returned to her family after being admonished to tell no one what happened. After a lengthy and brutal torture session, Billy provides the information needed to eliminate the rest of the gang; he is then left to die. Before Kelly can act on this new data, he must leave for Vietnam.
Due to a KGB mole , the Soviets anticipate Kelly's arrival and the mission is disastrously compromised. However, during his escape Kelly manages to capture Grishanov. The U.S. uses Grishanov as a bargaining chip to negotiate the transfer of the POWs to the Hanoi Hilton , where they will be confirmed as alive and eventually returned. The presence of mind Kelly shows in capturing rather than killing the Soviet officer impresses the CIA officers involved in the operation, particularly since it ultimately leads to the survival of Zacharias and the other POWs.
Upon returning to the United States, Kelly learns that Doris and her father had been murdered; he quickly deduces that there is a corrupt police officer on Tucker's payroll. Meanwhile, the police investigating the murders are beginning to close in on Kelly. Kelly determines that the location of Tucker's heroin lab is on board a derelict ship. He raids the drug lab, and eliminates still more members of Tucker's gang. He also frees Xantha Matthews, another prostitute and drug mule. Kelly deduces from the formaldehyde smell of the bags containing the Asian heroin that it has been smuggled into the U.S. inside the corpses of American soldiers killed in Vietnam.
Admiral Greer and CIA official Robert Ritter attempt to recruit Kelly to join the agency; however, by this point the police are closing in on the young soldier. Ritter agrees to help Kelly escape his legal woes in return for an illegal side operation of his own. The mole has been mis-identified as an aide to the National Security Advisor . A member of the wealthy elite, he is deemed politically untouchable and so cannot be charged with treason. As Clark, Kelly kills the supposed mole, inadvertently leaving the real mole, a Senate aide and anti-war activist, in place. Kelly rushes to complete his vendetta. Tracking the last of the gang to a new drug lab, he eliminates Tucker's mafia contacts, who have killed the police informant, Lt. Mark Charon, and Tucker himself.
Emmet Ryan, the lead police investigator, has finally identified and built a case against Kelly. He confronts Kelly on his boat, where Kelly comes clean about the drug gang and his operations against it. He begs Ryan for one more hour at liberty to put his affairs in order before being arrested; Ryan agrees. Instead, Kelly uses the hour to make his final preparations and then stages a feigned escape attempt using his boat. The Coast Guard is enlisted to pursue, piloted by Kelly's close friend "Portagee". Kelly is eventually run down but capsizes his boat rather than allow himself to be captured. With all the loose ends tied up, Portagee and the police assume Kelly is dead and close the case. Instead, Kelly is rescued by his CIA contacts, who recruit him into the agency under the new identity of Clark. He later quietly resumes contact with Sandy and marries her. The book closes with the release of the POWs after the end of the war.
References to other Ryan-verse works
As a prequel to many other Tom Clancy novels, Without Remorse makes frequent use of characters who appear later in the series.
This establishes the backstory for John Clark, who first appears in The Cardinal of the Kremlin and appears frequently in subsequent novels. CIA agents Admiral Greer and Bob Ritter, and Navy Admiral Joshua Painter are also introduced.
Kelly's girlfriend, Sandy, later marries him under his Clark identity. She appears in Debt of Honor and Rainbow Six . Sam Rosen is later mentioned in Red Rabbit as having been the surgeon who eventually fixed Jack Ryan's chronic back pain.
Manuel "Portagee" Oreza believes his friend to be dead, and does not encounter Kelly in Clear and Present Danger despite both being deeply involved in the events of that book. He finally discovers the truth as a minor subplot in Debt of Honor.
Homicide detective Emmet Ryan, Jack Ryan's father, is a supporting character in this work. Jack's mother Cathy also makes a brief appearance. Both will die in a plane crash shortly after the events of the book but are mentioned many times in passing later in the series. Jack himself also appears briefly to announce his decision to join the Marines; he later appears or is mentioned in every novel throughout the series, usually as the protagonist.
Peter Henderson is a minor senate aide and anti-war activist, recently recruited by the KGB. His prep-school chum and fellow anti-war activist Wally Hicks is mistakenly identified as the spy and killed, but Henderson never realizes that the death was anything but suicide. He appears later as "Agent Cassius" in Red Rabbit . In The Hunt for Red October , he is caught and made a double agent. In The Cardinal of the Kremlin , the disinformation he feeds the KGB is sufficiently valuable that he is offered his freedom. His American controller, FBI agent Hazel Loomis, loathes Henderson because she lost her father in Vietnam under circumstances similar to the events in this book, implying that the CIA's initial mistake was later corrected.
Film, television, or theatrical adaptations
Paramount Pictures bought the film rights to Without Remorse soon after the novel was released. There were several attempts to start work on the film, but it was always dropped soon after, along with attempts to adapt Clancy's hit novel Rainbow Six into a film. Without Remorse is currently in development with no release date set. According to Deadline, Paramount is courting Tom Hardy into playing the lead role of John Kelly. Christopher McQuarrie is in talks to direct as well as co-write the screenplay with Shawn Ryan and Stuart Beattie . Actor Kevin Costner is also rumored to portray William Harper. [1]
Notes
^ This is inferred by past-tense references to the Song Tay POW camp raid, which took place in November 1970. There are also ongoing references to the ongoing Major League Baseball season in which the Baltimore Orioles played the Pittsburgh Pirates in the World Series, which happened in 1971.
