The Blind Assassin is an award-winning, bestselling novel by the Canadian writer Margaret Atwood. It was first published by McClelland and Stewart in 2000. Set in Canada, it is narrated from the present day, referring back to events that span the twentieth century. The work was awarded the Man Booker Prize in 2000 and the Hammett Prize in 2001. It was also nominated for Governor General's Award in 2000, Orange Prize for Fiction, and the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award in 2002. Time Magazine named it the best novel of 2000 and included it in its list of the 100 greatest English-language novels since 1923.
Plot summary
The novel centres on the protagonist , Iris Chase, and her sister Laura, who grow up well-off but motherless in a small town in Southern Ontario. As an old woman, Iris recalls the events and relationships of her childhood, youth and middle age, including her unhappy marriage to Toronto businessman Richard Griffen. The book includes a novel within a novel , a roman à clef attributed to Laura but published by Iris. It's about Alex Thomas, a politically radical author of pulp science fiction who has an ambiguous relationship with the sisters. That embedded story itself contains a third tale, the eponymous Blind Assassin, a science fiction story told by Alex's fictional counterpart to the second novel's protagonist, believed to be Laura's fictional counterpart.
The novel takes the form of a gradual revelation illuminating both Iris' youth and her old age before coming to the pivotal events of her and Laura's lives around the time of the Second World War. As the novel unfolds, and the novel-within-a-novel becomes ever more obviously inspired by real events, we learn that it is Iris, not Laura, who is the novel-within-a-novel's true author and protagonist. Though the novel-within-a-novel had long been believed to be inspired by Laura's romance with Alex, it is revealed that The Blind Assassin was written by Iris based on her extramarital affair with Alex. Iris later published the work in Laura's name after Laura committed suicide upon learning of Alex's death in the war. Following the suicide, Iris realizes through her sister's journals that Richard had been molesting Laura for much of their marriage, blackmailing her to comply with him by threatening Iris's life. Iris takes her young daughter Aimee and flees her home, threatening to reveal that Richard had impregnated Laura and forced an abortion on her. This move estranges Iris from the last people who were supporting her, and creates bitterness between her and the grown Aimee. Iris deceives Richard into believing that Laura was the one having an affair with Alex Thomas, which drives him to commit suicide in despair. The novel ends as Iris dies, leaving the truth to be discovered in her unpublished autobiography that she leaves to her sole surviving granddaughter.
The book is set in the fictional Ontario town of Port Ticonderoga and in the Toronto of the 1930s and 1940s. It is a work of historical fiction with the major events of Canadian history forming an important backdrop. Greater verisimilitude is given by a series of newspaper articles commenting on events and on the novel's characters from a distance.
Main Characters
Iris Chase Griffen: The narrator and protagonist of the tale.
Laura Chase: Iris' sister, whose suicide opens the book and who is named as the author of the novel within.
Richard E. Griffen: Iris's ruthless, older husband with political ambitions.
Winifred Griffen Prior: Iris' fashionable, manipulative, and social-climbing sister-in-law.
Alex Thomas: A young author with Communist sympathies who has an affair with Iris and is one of the protagonists in the novel within.
Cpt. Norval Chase: The father of Iris and Laura. After being seriously injured in World War I and later widowed, he begrudgingly runs the family button business while descending into alcoholism and depression.
Reenie: The loyal Chase family housekeeper who becomes like a mother to Iris and Laura.
Myra Sturgess: Reenie's daughter, who later aids Iris in her old age.
Aimee Griffen: Iris' only child who is secretly fathered by Alex Thomas.
Sabrina Griffen: The daughter of Aimee and estranged granddaughter of Iris.
Callista Fitzsimmons: A young, bohemian sculptress with radical political views who becomes Norval's lover after his wife dies.
Walter Sturgess: The husband of Myra, who assists his wife in caring for Iris.
Mr. Erskine: A pompous, heavy-handed tutor who molests young Laura.
Elwood Murray: The nosy and effeminate editor of the local weekly paper.
Violet Goreham: A sentimental spinster who is temporarily employed to tutor Iris and Laura.
Liliana: The mother of Iris and Laura who dies when the girls are young.
Benjamin Chase: The grandfather of Iris and Laura who founded the button factory that becomes the source of the family's wealth.
Adelia Montfort Chase: Iris and Laura's elegant, fashionable grandmother who died before they were born, but looms large in Iris' imagination.
Edgar and Percival Chase: The younger brothers of Norval who are both killed in World War I.
Mrs. Hillcoate: A gossipy friend of Reenie's who is prone to making indiscreet remarks in front of young Iris and Laura.
