Dead in the Water is the third novel in the Stone Barrington series by Stuart Woods. It was first published in 1997 by HarperCollins. The novel takes place on the island of St. Marks, after the events in Dirt. The novel continues the story of Stone Barrington, a retired detective turned lawyer/private investigator
Swimming to Catalina
Dead in the Water is the third novel in the Stone Barrington series by Stuart Woods .
It was first published in 1997 by HarperCollins . The novel takes place on the island of St. Marks, after the events in Dirt . The novel continues the story of Stone Barrington, a retired detective turned lawyer/private investigator
Plot
This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.
(July 2012)
On a short vacation to escape his now hectic life in New York City, Stone Barrington set his sight on a lovely and romantic getaway to the islands of St. Marks. His companion, Arrington Carter, all-round superstar was to join him the next day.
Three events would ruin Stone's plans for a romantic boat cruise about the islands and leave him in the mist of a life or death trial. One was the New York weather, snowing in every airport available. Next was the sadden and fearsome ambition of his beau, Arrington Carter, high profile host and interviewer, who decided to track down another must-have editorial. Last was the sweet and gorgeous All-American girl standing trial for murdering her husband, where if convicted meant death, by hanging.
Racing to prove the young widow innocent of any wrongdoing pits Stone against a determined protector standing on the verge of becoming the next King of St. Marks. With little time to worked the case, leaving the young woman's head in a balance, Stone, once a police officer, now an up-and-coming lawyer, will do what he does best, defend his client with every skill he had to offer. Stone just hoped he didn't lose the new love of his life for his own fearsome and sadden ambition.
