Malgudi Days is a collection of short stories by R. K. Narayan published in 1943 by Indian Thought Publications. The book was republished outside India in 1982. The book includes 19 stories, all set in the fictional town of Malgudi, located in South India. Each of the stories portrays a facet of life in Malgudi. The New York Times described the virtue of the book as "everyone in the book seems to have a capacity for responding to the quality of his particular hour. It's an art we need to study and revive. " In 1986, a few of the stories in the book were included in the Malgudi Days television series and, directed by actor and director, Shankar Nag. In 2004, the project was revived with film-maker Kavitha Lankesh replacing the late Shankar Nag as director. The new series was telecast from April 26, 2006 on Doordarshan.
Malgudi Days is a collection of short stories by R. K. Narayan published in 1943 by Indian Thought Publications .
The book was republished outside India in 1982. [1] The book includes 19 stories, all set in the fictional town of Malgudi , [2] located in South India. Each of the stories portrays a facet of life in Malgudi. [3] The New York Times described the virtue of the book as "everyone in the book seems to have a capacity for responding to the quality of his particular hour. It's an art we need to study and revive." [4]
In 1986, a few of the stories in the book were included in the Malgudi Days television series and, directed by actor and director, Shankar Nag .
In 2004, the project was revived with film-maker Kavitha Lankesh replacing the late Shankar Nag as director. The new series was telecast from April 26, 2006 on Doordarshan . [5]
Chapters
" An Astrologer's Day ": A short story in which an astrologer meets his rival who he thought had for long been dead.
"The Missing Mail": A story about Thannappa, a postman who doesn't deliver a letter because of celebrations in a house.
"The Doctor's Word": A story about Dr Raman, a doctor who believes good words can't save lives, but tells a lie to his friend about his bad health.
"The Blind Dog": A story about a blind beggar who catches a dog to guide him through the streets. And he turns greedy, and also starts torturing the dog.
"Fellow Feeling": A story about Rajam Iyer, a Tamil Brahmin who is travelling in a train compartment and gets accused by a fellow passenger for eating fish.
"The Tiger's Claw": A story about the talkative man, it is told as a flashback, when he goes to a remote area and faces a man-eating Tiger.
"Iswaran": A story about a boy named "Iswaran" who failed his Intermediate Exams ten times, and when he passes it, in happiness, he gets drowned in the river Sarayu.
"Such Perfection": A story about a man who carved an image of god, that caused, because of its perfection, caused heavy natural calamities.
"Father's Help": A story about a boy named Swami, who didn't wanted to go to school, and told a lie that his teacher Samuel is very much violent, but his father writes a complaint to his principal.
