The Golden Spiders is a Nero Wolfe detective novel by Rex Stout. It was first published in 1953 by The Viking Press.
Plot introduction
His fist hit the desk, which for him was a convulsion. "No!" he roared. "Reputation? Am I to invite the comment that it is a mortal hazard to solicit my help? On Tuesday, that boy. On Friday, that woman. They are both dead. I will not have my office converted into an anteroom for the morgue!"
— Wolfe, declining to give Lon Cohen a human interest story, in The Golden Spiders, chapter 5
A youngster comes to Wolfe's office and tells Wolfe that he saw a woman driving a car, apparently being menaced by her passenger. The next day, the boy is murdered while washing car windows at a nearby intersection.
Plot summary
When Nero Wolfe reacts petulantly to an unexpected change made to one of his favourite meals by his chef Fritz Brenner, Archie Goodwin pranks him by allowing Pete Drossos, a twelve-year-old boy from Wolfe's neighbourhood, to enter the brownstone and disturb Wolfe's dinner. Drossos claims that while he was wiping the windows of a car at a nearby stoplight, the female driver -- who was wearing distinctive golden earrings fashioned into the shape of spiders -- indicated she was being threatened by her male passenger by mouthing "Help. Get a cop." To indulge Pete, Wolfe has Archie contact the police with the car's description and license plate, but the next day, Sgt. Purley Stebbins arrives at the brownstone, demanding to know the identity of Wolfe's source. A car matching the details Archie gave to the police and driven by a man in a brown suit and hat was involved in a vehicular homicide , and both Wolfe and Archie are shocked to learn that the victim was Pete Drossos.
Pete's mother visits the brownstone, informing Wolfe that her son's dying words were a request to hire Nero Wolfe to find his killer; she has brought his life-savings, totalling $4.30, with this in mind. Angered by Wolfe's reluctance, Archie uses Pete's money to have a newspaper advert published calling for the woman Pete had encountered to contact Wolfe. Upon seeing the advert, Inspector Cramer demands to know the reasons for Wolfe's involvement, and in doing so reveals that there is evidence that the same car that killed Pete was also responsible for running over and killing Matthew Birch, an agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, on the same day that Pete approached Wolfe.
A second response comes from Laura Fromm, a young and wealthy widow who arrives at the brownstone wearing golden earrings similar to those described by Pete. Initially claiming to be the woman in the car and asking for information about Pete, Fromm is horrified to learn of his murder and eventually admits that she wasn't, but she suspects she knows who was. Intending to seek Wolfe's advice after she has confirmed her suspicions, she gives Wolfe a retainer of $10,000. Although Wolfe warns her to be careful, the next day the news breaks of Laura Fromm's murder.
Incensed at the thought that two people seeking his help have been murdered soon after consulting with him, Wolfe announces that he intends to keep the $10,000 on the assumption that he has now been hired to solve Fromm's murder. Archie learns from Lon Cohen at the Gazette that on the night of her death Fromm had attended a dinner at the apartment of Dennis Horan, the attorney for Fromm's favourite charity, the Association for the Aid of Displaced Persons (Assadip). Pretending to be a mortician, Archie sneaks into Fromm's apartment to question Jean Estey, Fromm's personal secretary, but is prevented from learning much by the intervention of Paul Kuffner, a public relations advisor for both Fromm and the Association.
With little to go on, Wolfe engages the services of Saul Panzer, Fred Durkin and Orrie Cather. Panzer is assigned to investigate the Association, while Cather attempts to track the sale of the earrings. Durkin is assigned to confirm or deny an assumption that Wolfe is making -- that Matthew Birch was the passenger that Pete saw in the car. Under Wolfe's direction, Archie approaches several people involved in the case, among them Jean Estey, Horan's wife Claire and Angela Wright, the director of the Association, with an offer to reveal what was said in the conversation between Wolfe and Fromm. Angela Wright alerts Paul Kuffner, who attempts to bribe Wolfe to learn the information but is rebuffed.
Cather eventually learns from the jeweller who sold the unique spider earrings that it was Mrs. Fromm herself who purchased them. Soon after, both Panzer and Durkin report developments; Panzer, posing as a refugee seeking help from the Association, informs Wolfe and Archie that after a meeting with Dennis Horan he was visited by a man who demanded a large sum of money from him in order to avoid being hassled as an illegal immigrant to America, while Durkin reveals that he has made contact with Mortimer Ervin, a man who claims to have known Birch. While Cather goes to assist Panzer, Archie follows Fred to his meeting with Ervin, after which Fred is taken to a public garage. There, Ervin and another hoodlum, "Lips" Egan, discover that Fred is a private investigator and intend to torture him to learn who is investigating them. Archie sneaks into the garage and manages to disarm Egan by shooting his pistol from his hand, after which he and Fred subdue the criminals. Panzer and Cather arrive soon after, revealing that they were tailing Egan -- the same man who tried to extort money from Panzer.
A search of Egan's coat reveals a notebook with a lengthy list of the names and addresses of immigrants whom Egan and Erving were blackmailing . Under interrogation, Egan claims that Matthew Birch was running the extortion ring under the direction of a woman that Egan never met, before the interrogation is interrupted by an unexpected visitor -- Dennis Horan. The hoodlums and Horan are brought to Wolfe's office, where they are interrogated by Cramer and Stebbins; although Horan attempts to disassociate himself from the criminals, Egan confesses to the blackmail scheme and informs the police that Horan had a central role in the operation. Although the police begin to suspect Horan of being the murderer, after sending Cather on an unrevealed errand Wolfe announces that he is ready to identify the murderer.
Gathering the suspects in his office, Wolfe reveals that the police have been operating under a flawed assumption -- the 'man' driving the car that killed Pete Drossos was in fact a woman dressed as a man to conceal her identity. The woman was Jean Estey, who was both the head of the extortion ring and the driver of the car that Pete saw the day before; Matthew Birch was threatening her after Birch discovered she was taking more than her share of the blackmail proceeds, and although she later managed to overpower Birch and kill him, she realized that Pete could identify her and so murdered him to conceal her identity. Fromm had developed suspicions about Estey's corruption and had given her the spider-earrings to provoke a reaction after overhearing Estey's codephrase to her confederates -- "said the spider to the fly". Wolfe produces a tailor who claims to have sold Estey a suit matching the one worn by the driver of the car that murdered Pete; Horan confirms that Estey was the head of the blackmail ring, and she is arrested for murder. The case solved, Wolfe destroys the notebook containing the details of the illegal immigrants to prevent their identities from being exposed.
Cast of characters
Nero Wolfe — The private investigator
Archie Goodwin — Wolfe's assistant, and the narrator of all Wolfe stories
Fritz Brenner — Wolfe's master chef
Pete Drossos — A 12-year-old who lives in Wolfe's neighborhood
Anthea Drossos — Pete's mother
Mrs. Damon (Laura) Fromm — Socialite and philanthropist, major supporter of the Association for the Aid of Displaced Persons (Assadip)
Jean Estey — Mrs. Fromm's personal secretary
Paul Kuffner — Public-relations consultant for Assadip and for Mrs. Fromm personally
Angela Wright — Executive Secretary of Assadip
Dennis Horan — General counsel for Assadip
Claire Horan — His wife
Vincent Lipscomb — Editor and publisher of the periodical Modern Thoughts, and friend of Laura Fromm
James Albert Maddox — Personal counsel for Laura Fromm and executor of her estate
Matthew Birch — Of the Immigration and Naturalization Service
Lawrence (Lips) Egan — Organized crime figure
Mortimer Ervin — Local thug
Saul Panzer, Fred Durkin and Orrie Cather — Operatives employed by Wolfe
Lon Cohen — Of the Gazette
Inspector Cramer and Sergeant Purley Stebbins – Representing Manhattan Homicide
The unfamiliar word
In most Nero Wolfe novels and novellas, there is at least one unfamiliar word, usually spoken by Wolfe. The Golden Spiders contains one, spoken not by Wolfe but by attorney Maddox, and is the sort of legal term that Stout tended to avoid:
Replevy. Chapter 8.
Reviews and commentary
Anthony Boucher , The New York Times Book Review (November 15, 1953) — A highly professional and thoroughly satisfactory mystery.
James Sandoe, New York Herald Tribune (November 8, 1953) — Mr. Stout has fancied his case freshly, heard in acutely and if, after all this, he resolves it a little dully, there is to the last the pleasant acidity of Archie.
Saturday Review of Literature (November 21, 1953) — Nero Wolfe, armchair eye, solves three-ply killing while NY cops grind teeth. Archie Goodwin, aide, busy boy in this baffler; usual smooth job.
