The Wind from the Sun is a 1972 collection of short stories by science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke. Some of the stories originally appeared in a number of different publications. A part of the book was included in CD on board the Planetary Society's solar sail, Cosmos 1.
Something fishy is going on in a laboratory on the Moon... An inspector presses a scientist for the truth about the Moon and mankind's longevity.
"The Last Command"
The supreme commander of a superpower issues his final command via a pre-recorded message after he and the entire nation had been completely annihilated.
"Dial F for Frankenstein"
A tech-crew discuss the strange happenings since they have linked the world's telecommunications system with a satellite network.
"Reunion"
A message from extra-terrestrials, addressed to the people of Earth, speaking of the origins of mankind and a cure for skin color.
"Playback"
A monologue of a man's consciousness which had been preserved on magnetic tape.
"The Light of Darkness"
An assassin plots to remove the dictator of his African country.
"The Longest Science-Fiction Story Ever Told"
A recursive letter complaining about plagiarism.
"Herbert George Morley Roberts Wells, Esq."
Clarke's commentary about why he had confused "The Anticipator" with "The Accelerator". For a period of time Clarke believed that "The Anticipator" had been authored by H. G. Wells, and had even published this false fact, until a fan of Wells pointed out the error.
"Love That Universe"
A scientist believes that the Earth is in peril and that the civilization living in the central hub of our galaxy is our only hope. But, how will we contact them?
"Crusade"
In a world that does not orbit any star, an intelligent but non-biological being searches for other life in the universe like itself.
"The Cruel Sky"
A scientist, who was born crippled, climbs Mount Everest with the aid of his levitation invention and with the guidance of his promising assistant. However, soon after beginning their descent from the summit, gale-strength winds blow them and their levitators off the face of the mountain.
A commander explains, in a letter, how an Earth battleship got destroyed when it passed too close to the gravitational field of a neutron star.
"Transit of Earth"
The last surviving astronaut works to complete his mission while contemplating how he would commit suicide afterwards. He and three others were marooned on Mars because of an accident during orbital retrieval. His final mission is to record the raw data and video footage of Earth's and the Moon's transit across the Sun.
