Pollyanna is a best-selling 1913 novel by Eleanor H. Porter that is now considered a classic of children's literature, with the title character's name becoming a popular term for someone with the same optimistic outlook. The book was such a success that Porter soon produced a sequel, Pollyanna Grows Up (1915). Eleven more Pollyanna sequels, known as "Glad Books", were later published, most of them written by Elizabeth Borton or Harriet Lummis Smith. Further sequels followed, including Pollyanna Plays the Game by Colleen L. Reece, published in 1997. Pollyanna has been adapted for film several times. Some of the best-known include Disney's 1960 version starring child actress Hayley Mills, who won a special Oscar for the role, and the 1920 version starring Mary Pickford.
Plot summary
The title character is named Pollyanna Whittier, a young orphan who goes to live in Beldingsville, Vermont , with her wealthy but stern Aunt Polly. Pollyanna's philosophy of life centers on what she calls "The Glad Game", an optimistic attitude she learned from her father. The game consists of finding something to be glad about in every situation. It originated in an incident one Christmas when Pollyanna, who was hoping for a doll in the missionary barrel, found only a pair of crutches inside. Making the game up on the spot, Pollyanna's father taught her to look at the good side of things—in this case, to be glad about the crutches because "we didn't need to use them!"
With this philosophy, and her own sunny personality and sincere, sympathetic soul, Pollyanna brings so much gladness to her aunt's dispirited New England town that she transforms it into a pleasant place to live. The Glad Game shields her from her aunt's stern attitude: when Aunt Polly puts her in a stuffy attic room without carpets or pictures, she exults at the beautiful view from the high window; when she tries to "punish" her niece for being late to dinner by sentencing her to a meal of bread and milk in the kitchen with the servant Nancy, Pollyanna thanks her rapturously because she likes bread and milk, and she likes Nancy.
Soon, Pollyanna teaches some of Beldingsville's most troubled inhabitants to "play the game" as well, from a querulous invalid named Mrs. Snow to a miserly bachelor, Mr. Pendleton, who lives all alone in a cluttered mansion. Aunt Polly, too—finding herself helpless before Pollyanna's buoyant refusal to be downcast—gradually begins to thaw, although she resists the glad game longer than anyone else.
Eventually, however, even Pollyanna's robust optimism is put to the test when she gets hit by a car and loses the use of her legs. At first she doesn't realize the seriousness of her situation, but her spirits plummet when she is told what happened to her. After that, she lies in bed, unable to find anything to be glad about. Then the townspeople begin calling at Aunt Polly's house, eager to let Pollyanna know how much her encouragement has improved their lives; and Pollyanna decides she can still be glad that she at least has her legs. The novel ends with Aunt Polly marrying her former lover Dr. Chilton and Pollyanna being sent to a hospital where she learns to walk again and is able to appreciate the use of her legs far more as a result of being temporarily disabled .
Influence
"When you look for the bad in mankind expecting to find it, you surely will find it."[ citation needed ]
Although a quote similar to this was attributed to Abraham Lincoln and inserted by the director into the 1960 Disney movie version of the story, it is actually, as written here, from the original book and not attributed[ citation needed ].
The novel's success brought the " Pollyanna principle " (along with the adjective "Pollyannaish" and the noun "Pollyannaism") into the language to describe someone who seems always to be able to find something to be "glad" about no matter what circumstances arise[ citation needed ]. It is sometimes used pejoratively, referring to someone whose optimism is excessive to the point of naïveté or refusing to accept the facts of an unfortunate situation. This pejorative use can be heard in the introduction of the 1930 George and Ira Gershwin song But Not For Me : "I never want to hear from any cheerful pollyannas/who tell me fate supplies a mate/that's all bananas[ citation needed ]."
The word "pollyanna" may also denote a holiday gift exchange more typically known as Secret Santa [ citation needed ]. This term is used in Philadelphia and the surrounding areas of Pennsylvania [ citation needed ]. It can instead mean a gift exchange rotation in which several families each give gifts to one other family in the "pollyanna" each year[ citation needed ]. This is often done when siblings in a large family begin to have children of their own. [2]
Pollyanna is still available in reprint editions[ citation needed ]. At the height of her popularity, Pollyanna was known as "The Glad Girl", and Parker Brothers even created The Glad Game, a board game [ citation needed ]. The Glad Game, a type of Parcheesi , was made and sold from 1915 to 1967 in various versions, including: "Pollyanna - The Glad Game"; "Pollyanna - The Great Home Game"; "Pollyanna - Dixie"; and "Pollyanna"[ citation needed ]. The board game was later licensed by Milton Bradley but has been discontinued for many years[ citation needed ]. A Broadway adaption was mounted in 1916 titled "Pollyanna Whittier, The Glad Girl", starring Helen Hayes [ citation needed ].
"Glad Clubs" appear to have been popular for a while; however, it is questionable if they were ever more than a publicity gimmick[ citation needed ]. Glad Clubs may have been simply a means to popularize The Glad Game as a method for coping with the vicissitudes of life such as loss, disappointment, and distress. Nevertheless, at least one "glad club" existed till at least 2008, in Denver , Colorado . [3]
In 2002 the citizens of Littleton, New Hampshire unveiled a bronze statue in honour of Eleanor H. Porter , creator of the Pollyanna books and one of the town's most famous residents. The statue depicts a smiling Pollyanna, arms flung wide in greeting. Littleton also hosts a festival known as "The Official Pollyanna Glad Day" every summer. [4]
The vocalized version of the song "Pollyanna" for the video game Mother characterizes a cheerful girl that believes in fairy tales and optimism, but disregards any comments towards her sanity[ citation needed ]. The girl rejects the negative opposition against her and the mockery that comes with it, saying "You can call me 'Pollyanna'/Say I'm crazy as a loon"[ citation needed ]. The name of the song, and that of the girl in the song, is most likely a direct characterization of Porter's character. Another theory is that the name is based on Ana, a character in the game[ citation needed ].
The celebrated American science fiction writer Ray Bradbury described himself as " Janus , the two-faced god who is half Pollyanna and half Cassandra , warning of the future and perhaps living too much in the past—a combination of both". [5]
List of Pollyanna books
