The novel Live from Golgotha: The Gospel according to Gore Vidal is an irreverent spoof of the New Testament written by Gore Vidal. Told from the perspective of Saint Timothy as he travels with Saint Paul, the 1992 novel shifts in time as Timothy and Paul combat a mysterious hacker from the future who is deleting all traces of Christianity. In Vidal's memoir, Point to Point Navigation, he says that the book was originally titled Live from Golgotha and that the subtitle, "The Gospel According to Gore Vidal", was added by the book cover's designer without Vidal's permission.
978-0-679-41611-1
The novel Live from Golgotha: The Gospel according to Gore Vidal is an irreverent spoof of the New Testament written by Gore Vidal . Told from the perspective of Saint Timothy as he travels with Saint Paul , the 1992 novel shifts in time as Timothy and Paul combat a mysterious hacker from the future who is deleting all traces of Christianity.
In Vidal's memoir, Point to Point Navigation, he says that the book was originally titled Live from Golgotha and that the subtitle, "The Gospel According to Gore Vidal", was added by the book cover's designer without Vidal's permission. [1]
Memorable
St. Paul freely improvises his tales as he evangelizes. "'All things are contained within the single mind of One True God in His three aspects.' Saint Paul could dispense this sort of smooth bullshit while taking apart and reassembling a Holy Rolodex machine," Timothy relates as he witnesses St. Paul in action. Paul speaks in "ye olde" when he quotes the voluminous Christ. Timothy remarks that when Saul of Tarsus meets the Christ ghost, he converts to a religion that Saul/Paul himself had not yet founded. People are consistently disappointed to learn that Christ weighed 400 lbs. and spoke with a lisp. "Why doth thou persecute-eth me-th?" There is an interesting plot twist when Judas is mistaken for Christ and almost crucified. It seems that the "real Christ" was a militant Zionist, and Paul's golden-rule Christianity an improvisation. Paul journeys from town to town raising money and founding churches, adding to his Holy rolodex, and tap-dancing. Cameos from celebrities such as Nero , Petronius , and Shirley MacLaine are interspersed throughout Timothy's odyssey from CE 33 to CE 96.
^ Vidal, Gore (November 7, 2006). Point to Point Navigation: A Memoir. Doubleday . pp. ?. ISBN   978-0-385-51721-8 . 
|accessdate=
