The Doll People is a children's novel written by Ann M. Martin and Laura Godwin. It is illustrated by Brian Selznick, the author of The Invention of Hugo Cabret. It tells a story about the imaginary world of dolls when no one is watching. A doll made of china and her new best friend made of plastic try to find her aunt that long ago went on an adventure and never came back. Others in the series include The Meanest Doll in the World and The Runaway Dolls.
The Meanest Doll in the World
The Doll People is a children's novel written by Ann M. Martin and Laura Godwin. It is illustrated by Brian Selznick , the author of The Invention of Hugo Cabret . It tells a story about the imaginary world of dolls when no one is watching. [1] A doll made of china and her new best friend made of plastic try to find her aunt that long ago went on an adventure and never came back. Others in the series include The Meanest Doll in the World and The Runaway Dolls. [2]
Plot introduction
This children's tale is about a doll made of china named Annabelle, who is eight years old but has existed for more than one hundred years. The book is set in the present time period and is told in third person. Annabelle and her family belong to Kate Palmer. The dolls can move, talk, and play the miniature piano in their house but always return to the same spot they started from when a human approaches. The consequence of being seen moving is being "frozen" for twenty-four hours, also called Doll State. If a doll does something especially incriminating, the doll is "frozen" forever, called Permanent Doll State, or PDS. Kate's sister Nora receives a doll house and plastic doll family named the Funcrafts. The Funcrafts' daughter is Tiffany and she becomes Annabelle's best friend. In the book Annabelle and her friend Tiffany form a group called Society for Exploration and Location of Missing People (or SELMP for short), when Annabelle finds her Auntie Sarah's Journal. Auntie Sarah has been missing for 45 years and has not been seen or heard from in all that time. Annabelle and Tiffany become determined to find her. Using the clues from the journal, they deduce she is stuck somewhere, so they go on a journey and successfully locate her. The doll family is happily reunited once again.
