Cry of the Kalahari is an autobiographical book detailing two young American zoologist's, Mark and Delia Owens experience studying wildlife in the Kalahari desert in Botswana in the mid 1970's. There they lived and worked for seven years in an unexplored area named Deception Valley in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve. With no roads and no people and the nearest civilisation eight hours away they had only each other and the animals they studied as company, most of which had never seen humans before. Their research focused mainly on lions, brown hyenas, jackals and other African carnivores. Cry of the Kalahari is the personal story of the Owenses encounters with these and a myriad of other animals and depicts their own struggle to live and work in such an inhospitable and unforgiving environment. Cry of the Kalahari was a national and international bestseller, translated into seven languages and is the 1985 John Burroughs award winner.
Media type
Hardcover, Paperback
Cry of the Kalahari is an autobiographical book detailing two young American zoologist's, Mark and Delia Owens experience studying wildlife in the Kalahari desert in Botswana in the mid-1970s. There they lived and worked for seven years in an unexplored area named Deception Valley in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve . [1] With no roads and no people and the nearest civilisation eight hours away they had only each other and the animals they studied as company, most of which had never seen humans before. [2] Their research focused mainly on lions , brown hyenas , jackals and other African carnivores. Cry of the Kalahari is the personal story of the Owenses encounters with these and a myriad of other animals and depicts their own struggle to live and work in such an inhospitable and unforgiving environment. [3]
Cry of the Kalahari was a national and international bestseller, translated into seven languages and is the 1985 John Burroughs award winner. [4]
^ Mark & Delia Owens. 1985. Cry of the Kalahari. Great Britain. Robert Hartnoll Limited.
^ Owens Foundation for Wildlife Conservation. (1996 - 2011). Book Information. Retrieved 22 August 2011: http://www.owens-foundation.org/docs/bookinfo2.htm
^ Owens Foundation for Wildlife Conservation. (1996 - 2011). The Kalahari Years. Retrieved 22 August 2011: http://www.owens-foundation.org/docs/kalahari2.htm
^ Owens Foundation for Wildlife Conservation. (1996 - 2011). Book Information. Retrieved 22 August 2011: http://www.owens-foundation.org/docs/bookinfo2.htm
