Superfudge is a children's novel by Judy Blume, published in 1980. It is the sequel to Tales of a Fourth Grade Nothing.
Plot
Peter Hatcher is immensely devastated upon the revelation of his mother's sudden pregnancy, fearing that the unborn child will develop exasperating behavioral habits and phases like those exhibited by his younger brother Fudge, whom he intensely abhors. Fortunately, after the birth of the new baby (nicknamed "Tootsie" by her family) she proves to be much better behaved than Fudge, to Peter's relief; however, the reduced amount of attention paid to Fudge antagonizes him into contemptuously conspiring against his sister through committing misdeeds such as hiding her and covering her in stamps. Fortunately, this hostile animosity is overcome with time; however, their parents unveil their plans to temporarily relocate to Princeton, New Jersey for the year in pursuit of Warren Hatcher's plan to write a book, to Peter's dismay.
Luckily, Peter's unhappiness is quenched after becoming acquainted with a local boy named Alex Santo after the move, and the pair keeps themselves preoccupied by gathering earthworms for an eccentric, elderly neighborhood woman rumored to eat them. His mood is also uplifted with advantages such as his newly-developed infatuation with a girl named Joanne McFadden, although Fudge continues to demonstrate his usual uncontrollable behavior and tantrums, to the extent of being relocated to a different kindergarten class after having kicked his teacher. He also adopts a pet myna bird , naming it Uncle Feather and befriends a boy named Daniel Manheim. The year continues ordinarily, Fudge making the shocking revelation of his limited faith in Santa Claus and meeting his favorite storybook author, Brian Tumkin. Towards the conclusion of the family's stay in Princeton, Fudge, devastated over his brother's prohibiting him from accompanying him on a picnic with Alex, stuns the Hatchers by running away from home alongside Daniel on their bicycles , worrying the family to the extent of Peter showing fear for his brother's life. Luckily, Fudge and Daniel prove themselves to have thrived well on their trip, purchasing brownies from a local bakery and splitting a sandwich, as mentioned by Daniel in his recount of their experience. However, they are nonetheless disciplined by their dangerous actions through the temporary confiscation of their bicycles, and the Hatchers make the decision to return to New York after Tootsie has spoken her first words: "Nu Yuck."
