The Neverendidng Story character AURYN leads here. For the Spanish boy band, refer to Auryn The Neverending Story {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=200px|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}1997 Dutton edition coverAuthor(s) Michael EndeOriginal title Die Unendliche GeschichteTranslator Ralph ManheimIllustrator Roswitha QuadfliegCountry GermanyLanguage GermanGenre(s) Fantasy NovelPublisher Thienemann VerlagPublication date 1979Media type PrintPages 448ISBN 3-522-12800-1OCLC Number 7460007LC Classification PT2665.N27 U5 The Neverending Story (German: Die unendliche Geschichte) is a German fantasy novel by Michael Ende, first published in 1979. The standard English translation, by Ralph Manheim, was first published in 1983. The novel was later adapted into several films. The majority of the story takes place in the parallel world of Fantastica (Phantásien in the original German version; referred to as Fantasia in the films), a world being destroyed by the Nothing, a mysterious force. The first protagonist is a young warrior who is asked by the Steward of The Empress of Fantastica to set off and find a way to stop the Nothing; the other protagonist is a boy from the real world, a reader of a novel with the same title, for whom the story gradually becomes more and more realistic.
Plot summary
The book centers on a boy, Bastian Balthazar Bux, who is neglected by his father (who has sunken into despair after his wife's death) and is bullied by his schoolmates. Whilst running from some of them, Bastian bursts into the antique book store of Carl Conrad Correander. Bastian steals a book from the store called The Neverending Story which Correander has been reading; he hides in his school's attic, where he proceeds to read the story through the rest of the day and the night, not realizing that he has effectively become a part of it. After a while of reading he is magically transfixed and is brought into the book.
The book begins in Fantastica, when a " will-o'-the-wisp " goes to ask the Childlike Empress for help against the Nothing, which is spreading over the land. The empress is ill, which is believed to be the cause of the Nothing (or vice versa); she sends the only person who can stop the Nothing, a boy warrior named Atreyu, to find a cure for her. Atreyu is a brave person, being considered a warrior even though he is a young boy of Bastian's age.
While on his quest, Atreyu meets characters such as Morla the Aged One, the incorporeal oracle Uyulala, and the gnomes Urgl and Engywook. Atreyu also meets Falkor, the luckdragon, who helps him along the way. After Atreyu and Falkor get in the way of a fight of the wind giants, Atreyu gets thrown off Falkor's back and ends up in Spook City. There, Atreyu meets Gmork, the werewolf, who has been following Atreyu since the early days of his quest, intending to kill him. In the course of his quest, Atreyu learns about the true nature of Fantastica and the Nothing: Fantastica is a representation of the dreams and fantasies of the real world; the Nothing and the sickness of the Childlike Empress are the effects of the lies humans use in their greed for power; it is the denial of dreams and fantasy which is destroying Fantastica. The only thing that can save Fantastica is a human child, who must give the Childlike Empress a new name to start again the cycle of life in Fantastica.
Falkor and Atreyu return to the Ivory Tower, where the Childlike Empress lives. But since Bastian, in his lack of confidence, hesitates to take the step into Fantastica, the Childlike Empress confronts him with the fact that whatever he may think, he has already become part of the Neverending Story, and he must carry out his part in it. Bastian does so by crying out the name he has chosen for the Empress: 'Moonchild'.
Bastian comes to Fantastica and meets the empress; she asks him to help re-build Fantastica with his imagination, and he subsequently has many adventures of his own in his new world. With the help of AURYN, a medallion that links him to the empress, that grants all of the boy's wishes and, thus, gives him power over all the inhabitants of Fantastica, Bastian explores the Desert of Colors, battles the evil witch Xayide, and meets the three deep thinkers. In the Desert of Colors, he is told that the inscription of The Gem "Do what thou wilt" (Michael Ende says he traced this to Rabelais, Gargantua and Pantagruel, and St. Augustine, while denying any connection to Aleister Crowley) means it is his job to find out his own True Will ("and nothing is more difficult"); certainly not wishing whatever comes to his mind, even though The Gem does fulfil these wishes.
Bastian and Atreyu become friends. However, due to Bastian's continuous wishing with The Gem, he begins to lose his true self, as wishing costs one memory each time. Atreyu, who feels responsible to get Bastian safely back to the Real World, thus becomes increasingly more worried about him. Xayide exploits the growing tension between the two, driving Bastian to a lust for power and eventually having himself crowned as Childlike Emperor. Atreyu leads a rebellion against Bastian, but narrowly escapes with his life. Upon pursuing Atreyu, Bastian stumbled on a colony of humans who were trapped in Fantastica - having lost all their memories as they had recklessly indulged in the power of AURYN - and realizes what has nearly become of himself. (It may be mentioned aside that these men, for lack of something better to do, are getting occupied by a monkey to throw letters at dice with the intention to create this way, in infinite time, all possible stories, expressly including the Neverending Story.)
Bastian sets out to find the only thing he can wish for without losing himself: his own True Will, which will also bring him back to the Real World. He is told that he needs to cross the Fog Sea for this. The Fog Sea can only be crossed in the (total) community of the Yskalnari, who do not know the word "I" nor have any identity save the collective one. It becomes Bastian's wish to be accepted as part and parcel of this community; this wish, also, is fulfilled. Yet it breeds Bastians next wish, to be loved as a person with a personal identity - a wish which the Lady Aiuola (and her compassionate living-place, the Changing House) is ready to see done. After a long stay in the Changing House, Bastian finds out that his True Will is to do himself what the Lady Aiuola did to him, viz. love. Yet, as this was the second last wish he had to use (forgetting mother and father for it), he does not yet know whom. Thus he mines for little mosaics in a Mine specifically existing for the purpose, where he finds (forgetting his name for it) a mosaic of a man in a glass box. He instantly knows this is what he seeks, even though he has forgotten that the man really is his father, who, after his mother's death, fled into emotionlessness and cold routine. At this point, he is found by Atreyu, and, in remorse, lays down AURYN (the use of which Atreyu always advised against), only to find out that on this point, The Gem itself becomes the passage-way of both worlds. After Atreyu volunteers to bring the stories Bastian began to an end (something considerably difficult, especially because of some senseless wishes of Bastian), and also vouches for his name (it is only allowed to pass into the Real World if you still remember something) he is allowed to drink from the Waters of Life and bring them to his father also, finally freeing him from his "glass box" to life and love again.
After returning from Fantastica, he is distressed that the water in his hands has vanished. Yet he finds that he has, in fact, managed to bring the Waters of Life to his father when the latter, upon hearing Bastian's whole story (taking considerable time) and the sad end of it, bursts into tears. Having grown to a responsible person wishing to shoulder the consequences for what he has done, Bastian decides to confess to Carl Comrad Correander about stealing his book and losing it (it has vanished also), but Mr Coreander surprisingly never seems to have had the book Bastian had seen him reading in. However, the bookstore keeper, to another surprise of Bastian, is not inclined at all to disbelieve him; he reveals he has also ("certainly") been to Fantastica, and the two readily agree to see each other soon and talk about their respective experiences. But as Coreander surmises, this is not the true end of the story, as Bastian is now likely to lead others onto their way to Fantastica in order to preserve both worlds. Yet (to repeat a phrase often repeated in the book at the unfinished end of a plotline), "this is another story and shall be told another time".
