Arrow's Flight is a fantasy novel by Mercedes Lackey. Arrow's Flight was Lackey's second published work, and is the fifth in the "Heralds of Valdemar" series. The book is set in the fictional world of Velgarth. Arrow's Flight is identified as ISBN 0-88677-377-6. Arrow's Flight is the central book of a trilogy which began in Arrows of the Queen and concludes in Arrow's Fall.
Plot introduction
Queen's Own Herald Talia, Herald Kris and their Companions struggle to control Talia's rogue Gift and survive the mysterious presence of the Forest of Sorrows.
Plot summary
Arrow's Flight opens with two major events: Herald Talia earns her Whites (the white uniform worn by full Heralds) and Princess Elspeth, the Heir-presumptive, is chosen by the Companion Gwena.
Also in the opening section is a reminder of the distrust and animosity between Herald Talia and Lord Orthallen, a high-ranking councilor and advisor to Queen Selenay.
Shortly after Elspeth's confirmation as Heir-in-right, news reaches Haven that the Herald on patrol in a northern sector is out of commission due to injury. Herald Kyril assigns the sector to Talia for her year-and-a-half Field internship with the handsome Herald Kris, who is Orthallen's nephew. Before they leave, Orthallen tells Kris that he is afraid Talia is misusing her Gift of Empathy (the ability to read and influence the emotions of others).
Once they are on the road, Kris asks Talia about the rumor. She vigorously denies any use of her Gift to influence Elspeth or others, but the rumor nevertheless undermines her self-confidence. This, combined with a hitherto-unnoticed lapse in her training, results in a steady decline in her level of control over her Gift. She finds herself scarcely able to control how much emotion she is receiving or projecting, and she is afraid to ask Kris for help. Rolan, her Companion, assists her as much as he can.
About three months into the internship, the two Heralds, their Companions, and their pack animals are trapped by a severe winter storm in a Waystation located in the Forest of Sorrows. Talia's Gift goes rogue in a spectacular manner, projecting feelings of intense rage at Kris and both Companions. After a startled moment, Kris realizes what has happened, and he begins teaching Talia how to properly shield and control her power. The winter storm traps them for almost a month, during which time Talia gets the basics of control back, and she and Kris become lovers. They are also confronted by the mysterious force which inhabits the Forest, which perceives Talia as a threat.
The Heralds are soon met by a rescue party, and they resume the internship. Talia finds that the rumor that she misuses her Gift has reached this far, and she and Kris feel they must continue the circuit so that the Heralds won't lose face. As the book concludes, she has recovered mastery of her Gift, but she remains troubled by the ethics of using it. She is also worried about what effect her relationship with Kris will have on the relationship she wants to have with Kris' best friend, Herald Dirk.
Major characters
Herald Talia, Chosen of Rolan
Herald Talia is the Queen's Own Herald, now in name as well as in practice. Her Gifts include Empathy, the ability to feel and project emotions, and MindHealing, the ability to heal the mind using mind-magic. Notably, she does not have the ability of Mindspeech, or telepathy, an oddity among Heralds. As Queen's Own, she holds a special responsibility for the well-being of Herald-Queen Selenay and Herald-trainee Lady Elspeth.
Rolan is Talia's Companion; as well as the de facto leader of the Companions. The stallion is unique among Companions; sharing the characteristics of the former Companions of the various Monarch's Own Heralds. He emerged from the Companion's Grove fully grown when the previous Monarch's Own's Companion died; he does not appear to age; and he is especially fertile. Though not capable of actually "talking" mind-to-mind with Herald Talia, he has become adept at making his feelings known to her; as well as being able to pass on pertinent information and solutions.
Herald Kris, Chosen of Tantris
Herald Kris is the long-time partner of Herald Dirk, and the nephew of Lord Orthallen. His Gift is primarily Farseeing, the ability to view far away places without being there. He and Dirk work amazingly well together, and are the best of friends. Tantris is Kris's Companion.
Vanyel's Curse
A mysterious force that has inhabited the Forest of Sorrows since the death of Herald-Mage Vanyel Ashkevron . The Curse has protected Valdemar for those years from invasion from the North, by eliminating threats that pass through the Forest. It is later revealed that the Curse is the spirits of Herald Vanyel, his Companion Yfandes, and his lifebonded partner Stefen/Tylendel.
