Stuck in Neutral is a young adult novel by Terry Trueman. It focuses deeply on the subject of cerebral palsy, quality of life, and euthanasia. The main character is Shawn McDaniel who suffers from cerebral palsy. The story, told from Shawn's perspective, also focuses on how his family copes with the condition. Shawn's mother, brother, sister, and father are all talked about in the book. Stuck in Neutral received recognition as an Honor Book for the Michael L. Printz Award in 2001. Trueman wrote the novel because his own son suffers from cerebral palsy, and he wanted to educate young readers both about the condition and about showing tolerance for those with severe disabilities.
Plot Summary
The book follows Shawn McDaniel's first-person point of view . He is a 14-year-old boy with cerebral palsy, a brain condition. In Shawn's case, his entire body is affected; he has absolutely no control over any of his bodily functions. Shawn's condition is a major part of the story.
In the first few chapters, Shawn McDaniel explains to the reader his condition. He includes what he feels to be positive sides of his condition, such as his perfect memory . Shawn remembers every experience, every sensation, and everything he's ever learned from school or television. Shawn introduces his family to the reader. His mother is his main caretaker and his father is a writer who has won a Pulitzer Prize for a poem about Shawn.
The main story is about euthanasia. Shawn feels that his father Sydney McDaniel is trying to kill him. Sydney constantly talks about euthanasia. On an interview during a Jerry Springer -style show Sydney interviews a man who killed his son with a similar condition, who reveals that he just wanted to end his sons pain. Shawn frequently expresses that he dislikes being talked down to as if he were a baby. He stresses throughout the novel that he is just as intelligent, or more intelligent, than others around him. We are also introduced to his school life in the middle of the novel.
Reception
Stuck in Neutral caused controversy at a school in Evansville, Wisconsin , where the book was required reading. Parents felt the subject matter was too sad and violent. Trueman strongly defended his book and school officials in Wisconsin eventually agreed. Stuck in Neutral remains required reading in Special Education classrooms. [3] [4]
