Stig of the Dump is a children's novel by Clive King published in 1963. It is regarded as a modern children's classic and is often read in schools. It was illustrated by Edward Ardizzone and has been twice adapted for television, in 1981 and in 2002.
Plot summary
This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.
(July 2012)
Stig is a caveman. He lives at the bottom of the old chalk pit close to Barney's grandparents' house. Since the chalk pit is no longer used, people throw all their old junk away down there. So it is rather an interesting place to build a den.
Barney falls over the edge of the quarry and tumbles down through the roof of Stig's den. When he looks round, there's Stig, with his shaggy black hair and bright black eyes.
Barney and Stig get on rather well together. They have to manage without language, of course, but that doesn't seem to stop them. Stig's den is a brilliant place built out of discarded rubbish.
Stig is Barney's secret friend, not because Barney doesn't tell anyone, but because no-one really believes that Stig is real. They have a great time, improving Stig's den, collecting firewood, going hunting, and even catching some burglars who break into Barney's grandparents' house. It's really a collection of short-story adventures.
We know that Stig is a caveman, and really Barney hardly seems to give any thought to where Stig has come from until the end of the book. Then, during a very hot, sultry mid-summer's night, when Barney and his sister Lou can't sleep, they find themselves transported back in time and out onto the downs. To their surprise, they meet Stig, back with his own people, engaged in the construction of four gigantic standing stones. They spend a magical night camping out with the people of Stig's tribe, and helping to shift the final stone into position before sunrise.
Has Stig found a way to travel backwards and forwards in time, or is it as much a mystery to Stig as it is to Barney and Lou?
Adaptations
Stig of the Dump was adapted for television, firstly by Thames Television for ITV in 1981 [2] and later by the BBC in 2002 starring Thomas Brodie Sangster , Robert Tannion , Nick Ryan , Geoffrey Palmer , Phyllida Law , Perdita Weeks , and Michaela Dicker . [3] The BBC series won the BAFTA Children's Film & Television Award and its writer, Peter Tabern, received the Best Children's Writer award. The series has been released on DVD. [4]
The book has also been adapted for the theatre, to critical acclaim. [5] Topologika Software Ltd has published an adventure game based on the first three chapters of the book, for Windows . [6]
