The Jupiter Myth is a crime novel by Lindsey Davis.
Plot introduction
Set in Londinium , Britannia in August AD 75, The Jupiter Myth stars Marcus Didius Falco , Informer and Imperial Agent. It is the fourteenth in Davis' Falco series.
Explanation of the novel's title
The title is a reference to the use of Jupiter -related mythology by the crime syndicate to identify businesses associated with them.
Plot summary
Despite having put the project of building the palace for the king of the Atrebates , Togidubnus, back on track, there is no peace for Falco and his family in Londinium as Togidubnus' disgraced friend, Verovolcus (see A Body in the Bath House ), is found drowned in the well of a seedy Londinium taverna named the Shower of Gold, stripped of his torque . Fearful of the diplomatic consequences, the local authorities in the form of Gaius Hilaris (see The Silver Pigs ), Falco's old friend and Helena's uncle, urge Falco to take up inquiries into the death. At the same time, Maia Favonia, Falco's sister, her children and Lucius Petronius "Petro'" Longus, Falco's best friend, have appeared in Londinium and are lodged along with Falco's own family with Hilaris at his residence. Things become more tense with Togidubnus breathing down Falco and Hilarius' necks for answers on who killed Verovolcus, and a newly arrived businessman, Norbanus Murena, hitting on Maia.
Falco and his wife Helena investigate Londinium and discover extortion rackets terrorising the town when a fire breaks out at a bakery. The fire sparks memories of the sacking of the city fifteen years ago by the Iceni , which Londinium is just beginning to recover from. The Roman general Gaius Suetonius Paulinus had decided to sacrifice Londinium to preserve Roman control of the province as a whole, and after the sack, the city was quickly rebuilt as a planned Roman town. Falco muses on how suspicious the fire at the bakery is, since there was nobody in the bakery during the conflagration, and suspects that it was arson by whoever is behind the rackets. In the midst of the blaze, a vagrant girl risks her life to save a pack of dogs. Touched by this show of heroism, Helena adopts the girl, who is named Albia. The relationship between the Didii and Albia goes off on a rocky start, however, with Albia vandalising Hilarius' home. Simultaneously Petro' also disappears, and at a very bad time too — a message soon comes to Rome, saying that two of his children have passed away. Falco is forced to take Albia out along with him, and decides to look for Petro', but Petro' warns him to stay away because he is going undercover and then flees. Worse, Albia is abducted by a stranger and forced into a brothel. Falco goes to her rescue and is assisted by an unlikely ally: a group of female gladiators (or gladiatrices) led by an ex-girlfriend of Falco's named Chloris, now going by the stage name of Amazonia. The gladiatrices believe Falco to be responsible for Albia's plight and detain him, but he is rescued by both Albia and Helena (who was summoned by Albia). The reunion with Chloris temporarily strains Falco's marriage with Helena, but eventually they reconcile. Enquiries, however, begin to pay off and soon enough, with Chloris' help Falco manages to identify the rackets' enforcers in town, who are nicknamed Pyro and Splice. Falco, his friends and comrades soon notice something else — many of the businesses in town all have names derived from myths surrounding Jupiter, the chief god of the Roman pantheon. Chloris also reveals to Falco that she saw Pyro and Splice up-end Verovolcus into the well, and that whoever is employing them is also harassing her and her gladiatrix group into working for him.
A corpse is found on the wharves in Londinum and sure enough, it is the missing baker whose shop was torched. Falco is rejoined by Petro', who reveals he is on an undercover mission for the vigiles in Rome, tracking whoever is behind the Londinium rackets, and happened to witness the baker's murder (but unfortunately can't identify the perpetrators). After a brief discussion, they decide to arrest Pyro and Splice. As usual, things don't go down well — a lawyer named Popilius attempts to free the enforcers but fails. Pyro is poisoned and Splice manages to escape from custody before any of them can be interrogated by the chief torturer, ironically named Amicus (Latin: 'friend'). Meanwhile, king Togidubnus has managed to detain one of the employees of the Shower of Gold, a Briton named Flavia Fronta, who reveals the head of the rackets in Londinium and it's none other than Florius, the son of the late gangster Balbinus Pius (see Time to Depart ). Amicus' interrogations later confirm that Florius is in Britain, at the head of the racket which is named the Jupiter Company — hence all the businesses in Londinium with names connected to Jupiter — and that he is out to get Petro' too. Albia reveals to Falco and Helena that Florius was the man who abducted her earlier, and he had even raped her before Chloris rescued her.
Falco now hopes to apprehend Florius for murdering Verovolcus, but unfortunately for him and Petro', it's Florius who makes the first move by attacking Chloris, with the intent of wiping her out. A confused battle soon takes place at the local arena, with Falco and his entourage coming in to help Chloris and her comrades, and Splice coming in to take revenge on Florius. Chloris kills Splice, but is slain by Florius who subsequently escapes. A chance meeting with Popilius soon reveals a terrible truth: Norbanus, the businessman courting Falco's sister Maia, is also head of the Jupiter Company. To make matters worse, both Norbanus and Maia have disappeared and Florius sends Falco a message: Petro' must be handed over in order to secure Maia's release. Petro' willingly sacrifices himself and goes over to Florius, but Florius reneges on the bargain. Another battle takes place — this time between the Governor's legions and Florius' gangsters, who are holed up in a public building. Petro' is rescued from being crushed to death, and Falco captures Norbanus, but Florius manages to escape again. At the same time, Maia also appears — she had actually been stranded with her children while cruising the River Thamesis. Enraged at what Norbanus and Florius had tried to do to Petro', Maia personally kills Norbanus with a crossbow when he tries to flee.
Notwithstanding the end of the Jupiter Company, however, the case against Florius crumbles: the murderer of Verovolcus is revealed to be Flavia Fronta, the waitress at the Shower of Gold: she had stolen Verovolcus' torque and drowned him to prevent him from reporting her theft of his torque — which was recovered from the tavern. While this would satisfactorily resolve the diplomatic crisis with the Atrebates, it however now means that Petro's nemesis, Florius, cannot be indicted and is still at large. Cheated of success, Falco and Petro' swear that they will have their revenge on Florius.
Characters in "The Jupiter Myth"
Aelia Camilla - Wife of Flavius Hilaris, Aunt of Helena Justina.
Albia - Young street girl adopted by Helena
Amazonia - also known as Chloris. Gladiatrix , and ex-girlfriend of Falco.
Amicus - Official torturer
