Every Second Counts is a 2003 autobiographical book by cyclist Lance Armstrong written in collaboration with sports writer and columnist Sally Jenkins. It is a follow-up to Armstrong's It's Not About the Bike: My Journey Back to Life which was also written with Sally Jenkins. The narrative begins from after Armstrong's first Tour de France win in 1999 and continues up until his fifth win in 2003. In Paris on 25 July 1999, Lance Armstrong made world headlines with a stunning comeback, winning the Tour de France after battling against life-threatening testicular cancer just eighteen months previously. A few months after that historic victory, he became a father for the first time. His first book, It's Not About the Bike, charted his journey back to life and went on to become an international bestseller, and to win the William Hill Sports Book of the Year 2000. Now, in this follow-up, Armstrong shares more details of his life story, including four more Tour de France wins, an Olympic medal, and the births of his twin daughters Grace and Isabelle. Never shy of controversy, Lance Armstrong is a genuine global sports superstar and one of cycling's most recognizable figure. Here he offers his life philosophy - his thoughts on training, competing, winning, doping and failure. He also recounts the work done for the Foundation he set up following his dramatic recovery and introduces further inspirational tales of cancer survival. Every Second Counts is another book from a man who strives every day to meet life's momentous challenges. However, the authenticity of the tale of Armstrong's anti-doping stance described in the work has been challenged by a report from USADA in 2012.
It's Not About the Bike: My Journey Back to Life
Every Second Counts is a 2003 autobiographical book by cyclist Lance Armstrong written in collaboration with sports writer and columnist Sally Jenkins . It is a follow-up to Armstrong's It's Not About the Bike: My Journey Back to Life which was also written with Sally Jenkins. The narrative begins from after Armstrong's first Tour de France win in 1999 and continues up until his fifth win in 2003.
In Paris on 25 July 1999, Lance Armstrong made world headlines with a stunning comeback, winning the Tour de France after battling against life-threatening testicular cancer just eighteen months previously. A few months after that historic victory, he became a father for the first time. His first book, It's Not About the Bike, charted his journey back to life and went on to become an international bestseller, and to win the William Hill Sports Book of the Year 2000.
Now, in this follow-up, Armstrong shares more details of his life story, including four more Tour de France wins, an Olympic medal, and the births of his twin daughters Grace and Isabelle. Never shy of controversy, Lance Armstrong is a genuine global sports superstar and one of cycling's most recognizable figure. Here he offers his life philosophy - his thoughts on training, competing, winning, doping and failure. He also recounts the work done for the Foundation he set up following his dramatic recovery and introduces further inspirational tales of cancer survival.
Every Second Counts is another book from a man who strives every day to meet life's momentous challenges. [1] However, the authenticity of the tale of Armstrong's anti-doping stance described in the work has been challenged by a report from USADA in 2012. [2]
