The Eye of the Heron is a 1978 science fiction novel by U.S. author Ursula K. Le Guin which was first published in the science fiction anthology Millennial Women.
Major themes
The major themes in The Eye of the Heron are themes common to much of Le Guin's fiction and include the social constructions of gender , interactions between individuals from different societies, intra-actions within societies, and contact with that which is perceived as alien or other. The novel also explores different forms of social and political organization by juxtaposing pacifist anarchism with violent oligarchy . The characters' metaphorical internal journeys are reflected in literal external journeys throughout the plot.
When asked, in a 1995 interview, what role the feminist movement had played in her writing, Le Guin situated The Eye of the Heron in the context of her development as a writer:
"I gradually realized that my own fiction was telling me that I could no longer ignore the feminine. While I was writing The Eye of the Heron in 1977, the hero insisted on destroying himself before the middle of the book. "Hey," I said, "you can't do that, you're the hero. Where's my book?" I stopped writing. The book had a woman in it, but I didn't know how to write about women. I blundered around a while and then found some guidance in feminist theory. I got excited when I discovered feminist literary criticism was something I could read and actually enjoy. I read The Norton Book of Literature by Women from cover to cover. It was a bible for me. It taught me that I didn't have to write like an honorary man anymore, that I could write like a woman and feel liberated in doing so." [1]
Allusions to other works
The Eye of the Heron contains the phrase: "A beginning place". Le Guin reused this phrase in the title of her 1980 novel The Beginning Place .
Allusions to history
The Eye of the Heron refers to a fictional historical Long March which is probably an allusion[ original research? ] to any of several historical marches for social and political freedom.
Awards and nominations
