The Return of the Black Widowers is a collection of mystery short stories by science fiction author Isaac Asimov featuring his fictional club of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers. It was first published in hardcover by Carroll & Graf in November 2003. This book is the sixth and last of the six books featuring the Black Widowers. It was assembled and edited after Asimov's death by Charles Ardai, and collects the last six stories Asimov wrote for the series. These six previously uncollected stories are preceded by an introduction by Harlan Ellison, nine stories selected by the editor as the best from the previous Black Widowers collections, and a homage by William Brittain. They are then followed by a reprinted tale featuring a fictionalized version of Ellison (bringing the reprinted Widowers stories to ten), a new Black Widowers tale by Ardai, and an afterword by Asimov on the creation of the series drawn from his autobiography I, Asimov.
Puzzles of the Black Widowers
The Return of the Black Widowers is a collection of short mystery stories by Isaac Asimov featuring his fictional club of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers . It was first published in hardcover by Carroll & Graf in December 2003, and in trade paperback by the same publisher in November 2005. [1]
This book is the last of six books that collect the stories of the Black Widowers, a club based on a literary dining club Asimov belonged to known as the Trap Door Spiders . [2] It was assembled and edited after Asimov's death by Charles Ardai , and collects the last six stories Asimov wrote for the series. These six stories are preceded by an introduction by Harlan Ellison , nine stories selected by the editor as the best from the previous Black Widowers collections, and a homage by William Brittain . They are then followed by a tenth reprinted tale featuring a fictionalized version of Ellison, a new Black Widowers tale by Ardai, and an afterword by Asimov on the creation of the series drawn from his autobiography I, Asimov .
