Down The Rabbit Hole is the first book in the Echo Falls mystery series by best selling crime novelist Peter Abrahams. Ingrid is in the wrong place at the wrong time. Or at least her shoes are. And getting them back will mean getting tangled up in a murder investigation as complicated as the mysteries solved by her idol, Sherlock Holmes. With soccer practice, schoolwork, and the lead role in her town's production of Alice in Wonderland, Ingrid is swamped. But as things in Echo Falls keep getting curiouser and curiouser Ingrid realizes she must solve the murder on her own before its to late! This book is about the murder of Katherine Kovac (Cracked-Up Katie) and how 13-year-old Ingrid Levin-Hill catches the killer. This book was used in the 2008-2009 Battle Of The Books. It was the winner (tied) of the 2005 Agatha Award for Best Children/Young Adult Fiction.
Behind the Curtain
Down The Rabbit Hole is the first book in the Echo Falls mystery series by best selling crime novelist Peter Abrahams . Ingrid is in the wrong place at the wrong time. Or at least her shoes are. And getting them back will mean getting tangled up in a murder investigation as complicated as the mysteries solved by her idol, Sherlock Holmes. With soccer practice, schoolwork, and the lead role in her town's production of Alice in Wonderland, Ingrid is swamped. But as things in Echo Falls keep getting curiouser and curiouser Ingrid realizes she must solve the murder on her own before its too late!
This book is about the murder of Katherine Kovac (Cracked-Up Katie) and how 13-year-old Ingrid Levin-Hill catches the killer. This book was used in the 2008-2009 Battle Of The Books.
It was the winner (tied) of the 2005 Agatha Award for Best Children/Young Adult Fiction. [1]
Description
Ingrid is in the wrong place at the wrong time. Or at least her shoes are. Getting them back means getting involved in a murder investigation rivaling those solved by her idol, Sherlock Holmes , and Ingrid has enough on her plate with club soccer, school, and the plum role of Alice in the Echo Falls production of Alice in Wonderland . But much as in Alice's adventures down the rabbit hole, things in Ingrid's small town keep getting curiouser and curiouser. Her favorite director has a serious accidents onstage (but is it an accident?), and the police chief is on Ingrid's tail,but he is her friend's father, making her nervous about little everything from bike-helmet law to the color of her cleats. Echo Falls has turned into a nightmare, and Ingrid is determined to wake up.
