Carry Me Down (2006) is the second novel of British writer M. J. Hyland. It was awarded the Hawthornden Prize and was shortlisted for the Booker Prize. Carry me down is a spell-binding story of a young boy who can detect lies. Set in a small village, this extraordinary boy John Egan first realised his powers when his father ruthlessly three kittens and lied about not feeling bad. He had warm relations were with his kind hearted mother. They were broken because of unavoidable conditions which forced them to move to the growing misery of a big city. Young John thought that if truth was let out things will be back to normal. But world has changed, and truth is not a easy affair. His dream was to get a place in the Guinness book of world records as the first human lie detector. tragic strikes when he reveals a life-changing and deep secret of his dad. little does he know this would lead to a cat and dog fight between his mom and dad. John's mother is disgraced and so is John . But luckily his grandmother sorts things out welcomes them as their family again. This book ends with his Guinness dream being rejected and his disastrous truth detecting powers declining. he knows he is going to live a happy and contented life.
1-84195-740-2
Carry Me Down (2006) is the second novel of British writer M. J. Hyland . It was awarded the Hawthornden Prize and was shortlisted for the Booker Prize .
Carry me down is a spell-binding story of a young boy who can detect lies. Set in a small village, this extraordinary boy John Egan first realised his powers when his father ruthlessly killed three kittens and lied about not feeling bad. He had warm relations with his kind-hearted mother. They were broken because of unavoidable conditions which forced them to move to the growing misery of a big city. Young John thought that if truth was let out things would be back to normal. But the world has changed, and truth is not an easy affair. His dream was to get a place in the Guinness Book of World Records as the first human lie detector. Tragedy strikes when he reveals a life-changing and deep secret of his dad. Little does he know this will lead to a cat and dog fight between his mom and dad. John's mother is disgraced and so is John. But luckily his grandmother sorts things out, and welcomes them as family again. This book ends with his Guinness dream being rejected and his disastrous truth-detecting powers declining. He knows he is going to live a happy and contented life.
