The MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (1977; 7th ed. , 2009) is a publication of the Modern Language Association of America, based on The MLA Style Manual (3rd ed. , 2008). According to the MLA, since its first publication in 1985, the MLA Style Manual has been "the standard guide for graduate students, scholars, and professional writers" ("What Is MLA Style?"). Like the MLA Style Manual, the MLA Handbook is an academic style guide widely used in the United States, Canada, and other countries, providing guidelines for writing and documentation of research in the humanities, such as English studies; the study of other modern languages and literatures, including comparative literature; literary criticism; media studies; cultural studies; and related disciplines ("What Is MLA Style?"). Released in March 2009, the seventh edition of the MLA Handbook (like its previous editions) is addressed primarily to secondary-school and undergraduate college and university teachers and students ("What Is MLA Style?"). According to the MLA, "For over half a century, the MLA Handbook is the guide millions of writers have relied on," and "It provides an authoritative presentation of MLA documentation style for use in student writing."
e
The MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (1977; 7th ed., 2009) is a publication of the Modern Language Association of America , based on The MLA Style Manual (3rd ed., 2008). According to the MLA, since its first publication in 1985, the MLA Style Manual has been "the standard guide for graduate students, scholars, and professional writers" ("What Is MLA Style?").
Like the MLA Style Manual, the MLA Handbook is an academic style guide widely used in the United States , Canada , and other countries, providing guidelines for writing and documentation of research in the humanities , such as English studies (including the English language , writing , and literature written in English); the study of other modern languages and literatures , including comparative literature ; literary criticism ; media studies ; cultural studies ; and related disciplines ("What Is MLA Style?"). Released in March 2009, the seventh edition of the MLA Handbook (like its previous editions) is addressed primarily to secondary-school and undergraduate college and university teachers and students ("What Is MLA Style?"). According to the MLA, "For over half a century, the MLA Handbook is the guide millions of writers have relied on," and "It provides an authoritative presentation of MLA documentation style for use in student writing."
History
The first 5 editions, published between 1977 and 1999 were titled the MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations (WorldCat).
The title changed to the MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers in 2003 (6th ed.).
See also
Parenthetical referencing
External links
