The Fifth Child is a novel by the British writer Doris Lessing, first published in the United Kingdom in 1988, and since translated into a number of languages. The book describes the changes in the happy life of a married couple, Harriet and David Lovatt, which occur as consequence of the birth of Ben, their fifth child. A sequel, Ben, in the World (2000) further develops Ben's life after he has left his family.
21411827
The Fifth Child is a short novel by the British writer Doris Lessing , first published in the United Kingdom in 1988, and since translated into a number of languages. The book describes the changes in the happy life of a married couple, Harriet and David Lovatt, which occur as a consequence of the birth of Ben, their fifth child. A sequel, Ben, in the World (2000) further develops Ben's life after he has left his family.[ citation needed ]
Plot
When David Lovatt meets Harriet at an office party, they both immediately fall in love. They both share the same conservative outlooks, which they perceive to be a rarity in the London of the 1960s.
The two marry and purchase a large house in a small town within commuting distance of London. The couple both intend to have several children, a wish frowned upon by the rest of the family. By the time they have four children, two boys and two girls, their house becomes a centre of joy not only for them but for all their relatives and friends who come and visit. This continues until Harriet has a fifth, wildly dysfunctional child, Ben. Her painful pregnancy with him marks the beginning of the misery and suffering that this child brings to the whole family. [1]
Harriet Lovatt. Main female character. Married to David Lovatt.
David Lovatt. Man male character. Married to Harriet Lovatt.
Luke. Harriet's and David's first child.
Helen. Harriet's and David's second child.
Jane. Harriet's and David's third child.
Paul. Harriet's and David's fourth child.
Ben. Harriet's and David's fifth child.
James Lovatt. David's and Deborah's father. Has divorced Molly and married Jessica instead.
Molly. David's and Deborah's mother. Has divorced James and married Frederic instead.
Deborah Lovatt. David's sister.
Dorothy. Harriet's mother.
Sarah. Harriet's sister. Is married to William and has children with him. One of them is Amy, who has Down syndrome.
Angela. Harriet's sister.
