False Impression is a mystery novel by English author Jeffrey Archer, first published in February 2005 by Macmillan. The novel was published in several countries, including Brazil, where it was first released in 2007 by Bertrand Brasil. False Impression concerns an international journey through several countries and continents, including London, New York, Bucharest and Tokyo, and includes historical information about the September 11 attacks on New York, of which the protagonist, Anna Petrescu, escapes after being fired by the banker Bryce Fenston. From this point on, the book tells the story of Anna trying to help Arabella Wentworth, a British lady, to recover her family's fortune selling a historical painting by Vincent Van Gogh. She is followed close by Krantz, a mercenary on service to Fenston, and by Jack Delaney, an FBI agent that is trying to discover if Anna are still working for Fenston, target of his main investigation. In the end Krantz is shot,for the second time in a few days, and later captured and sent to the Belmarsh prison. The painting is successfully sold to a Japanese steel magnate, and Jack Delaney gathers enough proof to arrest Fenston.
1-4050-3255-3
False Impression is a mystery novel by English author Jeffrey Archer , first published in February 2005 by Macmillan ( ISBN 1405032553 ). The novel was published in several countries, including Brazil , where it was first released in 2007 by Bertrand Brasil .
False Impression concerns an international journey through several countries and continents, including London, New York, Bucharest and Tokyo , and includes historical information about the September 11 attacks on New York, which the protagonist , Anna Petrescu, escapes after being fired by the banker Bryce Fenston. From this point on, the book tells the story of Anna trying to help Arabella Wentworth, a British aristocrat, to recover her family's fortune selling a historical painting by Vincent van Gogh . She is followed closely by Irma Krantz, a mercenary on service to Fenston, and by Jack Delaney, an FBI agent who is investigating Fenston and trying to discover if Anna is still working for Fenston. In the end Krantz is shot, for the second time in a few days, and later captured and sent to the Belmarsh prison . The painting is successfully sold to a Japanese steel magnate, and Jack Delaney gathers enough proof to arrest Fenston.
