Alternate Presidents is a 1992 Tor alternate history anthology, edited by Mike Resnick. Each story is by a different author, and presents a scenario where an individual becomes President of the United States in a way that did not occur in real life.
Benjamin Franklin becomes the first President in 1789 , and creates a more democratic society.
The War of '07
Aaron Burr is elected president in 1800 against Thomas Jefferson , establishes an alliance with Napoleon Bonaparte , and creates a family dictatorship . Aaron Burr serves as president until he dies in 1836.
Black Earth and Destiny
Andrew Jackson is elected president in 1824 , four years earlier than in reality. As a result, biological and chemical engineering are developed earlier.
Chickasaw Slave
Davy Crockett is elected president in 1828 , resulting in the Civil War occurring over the Compromise of 1850 .
How the South Preserved the Union
David Rice Atchison becomes President in 1849 after Zachary Taylor and Millard Fillmore are killed in a carriage accident shortly into their terms as president and vice president, resulting in the Northern states seceding from the country.
Now Falls the Cold, Cold Night
Millard Fillmore is elected in 1856 after James Buchanan suffers a stroke in October, resulting in ethnic tensions in New England over the fugitive slave laws . John C. Frémont becomes President of the New England Confederacy with William Tecumseh Sherman as his commanding general, opposed by the Army of the United States under Robert E. Lee .
Lincoln's Charge
Stephen A. Douglas is elected President in 1860 , resulting in Abraham Lincoln becoming a general in the Union Army during the Civil War.
We Are Not Amused
A constitutional amendment allows Victoria Woodhull to be elected President in 1872 . The story is a series of letters from Queen Victoria to the new President.
Patriot's Dream
Leila Morse agrees to marry Samuel J. Tilden , giving him the impetus to secure his 1876 electoral college victory.
I Shall Have a Flight to Glory
Tilden wins the 1880 election against James Garfield using underhanded tactics.
Love Our Lockwood
Belva Ann Lockwood is elected in 1888 , resulting in expanded democratic rights. Lockwood serves as president until she is defeated in the 1892 election by Grover Cleveland .
Plowshare
Martha Soukup
William Jennings Bryan is elected in 1896 . He serves one term, during which Hawaii and the former Spanish colonies become independent nations, before retiring. Teddy Roosevelt never becomes president, female suffrage is passed in 1913, and the elderly Bryan opposes entry into World War I following the sinking of the Lusitania .
The Bull Moose at Bay
Theodore Roosevelt wins his Bull Moose Party election in 1912 as his health is good since his attempted assassin's bullet missed him. As president, he secures women's suffrage and wins the war against Germany within a year.
A Fireside Chat
Jack Nimersheim
James M. Cox is elected in 1920 . In 1921, he is assassinated, leaving his Vice President, Franklin D. Roosevelt , to become President. Adolf Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany earlier than in real life and the two of them establish an alliance to maintain the balance of power.
Fighting Bob
Robert M. La Follette, Sr. is elected President in 1924 , but dies the next year (as he did in real life).
Truth, Justice, and the American Way
Al Smith runs as a third party candidate in the 1932 election . Due to the split in the Democratic Party , Herbert Hoover is reelected against Franklin D. Roosevelt . As a result, the Munich Agreement prevents World War II . Due to the continuing presence of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan , totalitarianism and anti-Semitism grow stronger across the world well into the 1960s.
Kingfish
Huey Long escapes assassination in 1935 and is elected President with John Nance Garner as his Vice President in 1936 . World War II is averted when Long invites Hitler to Washington and then assassinates him.
No Other Choice
Thomas E. Dewey is elected President in 1944 and ends World War II by dropping the atomic bomb on Tokyo .
The More Things Change...
Dewey wins the 1948 election against Harry S. Truman by playing to anti-communist fears.
The Impeachment of Adlai Stevenson
Adlai Stevenson is elected in 1952 because Dwight D. Eisenhower chooses Joseph McCarthy as his running mate. Stevenson is re-elected in 1956 but impeached and forced to resign in 1958. His vice president, John F. Kennedy , becomes President.
Heavy Metal
A feud between John F. Kennedy and Richard J. Daley leads to Richard Nixon being elected President in 1960 .
Fellow Americans
Barry Goldwater wins the election in 1964 and uses nuclear weapons to win the Vietnam War . Richard Nixon becomes a popular talk show host, with his show running for over 20 years.
Dispatches From the Revolution
Robert F. Kennedy avoids assassination, and Lyndon B. Johnson runs in the 1968 presidential election . As a result, the 1968 Democratic National Convention leads to an actual revolution and autocratic rule in the US.
Suppose They Gave a Peace...
George McGovern is elected in 1972 , and attempts a tricky immediate withdrawal from the Vietnam War.
Paper Trail
McGovern is elected in 1972 after G. Gordon Liddy murders Carl Bernstein to cover up the Watergate scandal .
Demarche to Iran
Gerald Ford is retained as President in the 1976 presidential election and threatens war with Iran over the Iran hostage crisis .
Huddled Masses
Walter Mondale is elected President in 1984 against Ronald Reagan . As a result, the Sandinista movement expands, causing a civil war in Mexico followed by a US invasion, and a swarm of Latin American refugees overruns the American Southwest .
Dukakis and the Aliens
