The City of Dreaming Books is the fourth novel in the Zamonia series written and illustrated by German author Walter Moers, but the third to be translated into English by John Brownjohn. The German version was released in Autumn 2004, and the English version followed in Autumn 2007.
Plot
Protagonist Optimus Yarnspinner (Hildegunst von Mythenmetz in the German) is a Lindworm ( dinosaur ) who inherits his authorial godfather 's possessions, including a perfect story written by an unknown author, in search of whom he travels to Bookholm, a city devoted to literature above labyrinthine catacombs containing many valuable books, among various monsters and perils. There, a publisher directs him to antagonist Pfistomel Smyke, who possesses the most valuable books on the market and controls the book trade throughout Zamonia, by musical hypnosis . At his house, Smyke reveals his plan to eradicate all forms of art in Zamonia; drugs Yarnspinner; and transfers him to the catacombs.
Waking, Yarnspinner attempts to reach the surface, but falls victim to a trap and re-appears in Unholm, the monster-infested rubbish dump of the catacombs. Wandering out, he falls victim to a Spinxxx, a spider -like monster, but is rescued by a Bookhunter (one of the murderous mercenaries who explore the catacombs in search of ancient books), who thereafter tries to eat Yarnspinner, but is killed by an unknown force. Yarnspinner then finds the Booklings, friendly gnomes devoted to memorizing books, tending to the dying Colophonius Regenschein, the only good Bookhunter. They are attacked by evil Bookhunters led by Regenschein's mortal enemy, Rongkong Koma; and Yarnspinner escapes to Shadowhall Castle, home of the 'Shadow King', the mysterious author sought by Yarnspinner: a human surgically altered by Smyke, to be taller, stronger, and possessed of impenetrable paper skin, that bursts into flame in contact with sun or moonlight, who tutors Yarnspinner in the art of writing. After the Shadow King frees the Booklings' library and gains entrance to Smyke's personal library, they are ambushed by the Bookhunters, who are hypnotized into killing each other by the Booklings. At Smkye's bookshop, the Shadow King kills Smyke and sets himself and the city afire. Yarnspinner, having fled with the antique and fearsome Bloody Book, leaves the city, having attained the Orm, the universal source of creativity. [2]
Word Play
The names of many of the authors listed in The City of Dreaming Books are anagrams of famous authors. Below are a few listed in alphabetical order by the last name of the real-world author).
