Dawnthief is a fantasy novel by James Barclay. It was first published in the UK in 1999. The story is about the Raven (a mercenary group), six men and an elf. Swords for hire in the wars that have torn Balaia apart. Now they must join forces with dark mages and find a spell to end the world. The heroes of this novel are accidentally drawn into a plot revolving around the subjugation of the free peoples of their homeworld: Balaia. During a battle they become aware of a Xeteskan mage who informs them that an old magical enemy has returned to their world; the Wytch Lords. Denser, as the mage is called, explains that the world today does not have the power to defeat these enemies as they did before and that in order to save the realm he needs their help in finding an ancient spell of great power: Dawnthief. Along the way to finding dawnthief they discover that the spell is highly risky and if it does not work the sun shall never rise again. The excitement of this book is in its fast pace, magical originality and the fact that no character, even the heroes, is immune to the dangers of battle. Called action fantasy by its reviewers and praised by such authors as Maggie Furey, John Marco, David Langford and Stan Nicholls, Dawnthief is exciting fantasy mixed in with a dash of something special which has made its author one of the most successful British writers of the past few years.
Synopsis of The Raven 
The Raven are band of mercenaries , from the continent of Balaia , who are famous, with a reputation for being the best at what they do. As a result, they already have all the money they need and so the fights and missions they choose to do during the books are what they choose to do and not what they are paid to do - this means that they do what they consider to be the just and right thing to do. The Raven have been together ten years before the beginning of DawnThief , and have already lost two members named Kirst and Halyn.
Each time a member of the Raven dies they observe their own private rituals, holding a Vigil and promising never to forget the dead member.
Philosophy of The Raven 
The Raven are a very close knit group of friends. They share an utter belief that they will succeed in what they choose to do simply because they are The Raven.
Their code of conduct is such that they will never commit an act of murder, never take an action without consulting the rest of the group and will trust one another with their lives.
Nothing is more important to them then their group and whilst they will fight for country, plane and the greater good of their world; it is wholly because of their love for one another that they decide on which missions to undertake. Even then the matter is discussed by The Raven as a whole before it is acted upon and all major decisions for the group are discussed openly amongst them.
They all devote themselves entirely to each other, such that should any one of them need help then the others will let nothing stand in their way to give it, even war or death.
