Ark Angel is the sixth book in the Alex Rider series written by British author Anthony Horowitz. The book was released in the United Kingdom on April 1, 2005 and in the United States on April 20, 2006.
Plot summary
Following events of Scorpia , Alex Rider is in a hospital recovering from an assassination attempt from the last book in the Alex Rider series. Four masked men come to the hospital attempting to kidnap Paul Drevin , the son of Russian billionaire Nikolei Drevin , who is financing a revolutionary space hotel named "Ark Angel". Alex, in an attempt to save Paul, pretends to be Paul and fights the men. He knocks all four of them out, but then a fifth man comes in to the hospital and overpowers Alex. Still weak, Alex faints and is kidnapped by the four men.
Alex is taken to a flat in a building site, where he finds out the men belong to Force Three , an eco-terrorist group led by a man named Kaspar . Despite proving he is not Paul Drevin, Force Three locks Alex up and set fire to the apartment. Remarkably, Alex escapes and Nikolei invites him to come and stay for two weeks in the lap of luxury for saving his son and see an Ark Angel rocket take off. While at Nikolei's home, Alex starts to befriend Paul, but decides to leave him and his father once they arrive in New York in route to Flamingo Bay, due to Nikolei nearly killing him in a go-kart race.
At the New York airport, Alex is held up at customs and taken to the CIA. He is told that Nikolei could be "the biggest criminal in the world", and is recruited by the CIA to gain information on him. Upon his arrival at Flamingo Bay, Nikolei learns of Alex's CIA connections and decides to have him killed while scuba diving. Alex becomes trapped in a sunken ship named the Mary Belle, but with the help of Tamara Knight , an undercover CIA agent posing as Nikolei's secretary, Alex escapes.
Alex and Tamara hide on the island but are captured shortly after Force Three arrive on the island. Nikolei ties Alex up and then tells Alex that his rocket Gabriel 7 contains a bomb that will destroy Ark Angel, causing it to fall to Earth and destroy Washington, D.C . This will eradicate the evidence against him the CIA have accumulated in the Pentagon , as well as letting him reclaim some of his money spent on the (now regretted) Ark Angel project. It is also revealed that Nikolei created Force Three so that they could take the fall for Ark Angel's destruction.
Alex escapes using a CIA gadget from Tamara, and meets up with the CIA. They go back to the island to prevent the rocket from taking off, but they are unsuccessful. Nikolei, fearing he will be captured, tries to get away in a seaplane , but Alex causes it to crash by tying two canoes to the plane, killing him.
Alex is then chosen to board a second rocket to move the bomb before it explodes, since he is the only one small enough to fit inside the spacecraft. When Alex arrives, he sees Kaspar fights him. Alex gains the upper hand when Kaspar is blinded by the sun's light, and then Kaspar is killed when he falls back on his own knife. Alex moves the bomb into the station's toilet and escapes. His escape capsule splashes down in the sea near Australia. The bomb explodes and the satellite falls harmlessly into the sea.
Reception
Philip Ardagh at The Guardian gave Ark Angel a positive review, stating "It's perfectly pitched at its readership. Ark Angel reads the way a children's thriller should read" and "This is a welcome new addition [to the series]." [3] However, Joe Queenan of The New York Times gave the book a more negative review. Comparing it to Charlie Higson 's Blood Fever , the reviewer criticised Ark Angel for having "zero intellectual content", calling Horowitz's prose style "clunky, uninspiring". He also described Alex as "oddly bland" and "humorless". [4]
