When the Emperor was Divine is a historical fiction novel written by American author Julie Otsuka about a Japanese American family sent to an internment camp in the Utah desert during World War II. The novel is written through the perspective of five family members, detailing their experiences about relocation and their time in the internment camps. It is Otsuka's debut novel, and was published in the United States in 2002 by Alfred A. Knopf.
978-0-385-72181-3
When the Emperor was Divine is a historical fiction novel written by American author Julie Otsuka about a Japanese American family sent to an internment camp in the Utah desert during World War II . The novel is written through the perspective of four family members, detailing their experiences about relocation and their time in the internment camps. It is Otsuka's debut novel , and was published in the United States in 2002 by Alfred A. Knopf .
Plot
When the Emperor was Divine follows a Japanese American family during World War II, told through perspectives of the four family members over five chapters. The first is told from the mother's perspective as the family is forced to leave their home in Berkeley, California . Chapter two is narrated through the family's 11-year-old daughter, and depicts the family on a train ride to the Topaz War Relocation Center in Utah. Their eight-year-old son describes their time at Topaz, where the family is held for three years. This chapter shows both children's development. The girl becomes a teen while the boy loses much of his innocence and childish mannerisms. The fourth chapter is told from the reminiscent "we" perspective and depicts the family's struggles upon returning home. They attempt to regain their lives before the war financially and socially. The fifth and final chapter describes the activities of the father, who was arrested by the FBI and sent to a different camp in New Mexico . [1]
Reception and awards
The book was met with a generally positive reception. Writing for The New York Times , literary critic Michiko Kakutani stated "though the book is flawed by a bluntly didactic conclusion, the earlier pages testify to the author's lyric gifts and narrative poise". [1] Sylvia Santiago of Herizons Magazine described Otsuka's writing style as "scrupulously unsentimental", thus "creating a contrast to the sensitive subject matter". [2] O: The Oprah Magazine said the novel was "a meditation on what it means to be loyal to one's country and to one's self, and on the cost and the necessity of remaining brave and human". [3]
