Five Go Off To Camp is the seventh novel in the Famous Five children's adventure series by Enid Blyton. It was first published in 1948, and was followed by a number of reprints and translations. The story evolves around mysterious "spook trains" that the Five hear about on a lonely moor. The book has been adapted to two television series.
Five Get Into Trouble
Five Go Off To Camp is the seventh novel in the Famous Five children's adventure series by Enid Blyton . It was first published in 1948, and was followed by a number of reprints and translations. The story evolves around mysterious "spook trains" that the Five hear about on a lonely moor. [1] [2] The book has been adapted to two television series.
Plot
Julian, Dick, George, Anne and Timmy the dog (the Famous Five) are planning to go camping in a moor with the absent-minded and insect-loving Mr Luffy, a teacher at Julian and Dick's school. When they arrive at camp they find that their camping site is close to a farm, and that several old train tracks run under the moors, some of them are unused. They soon make friends with a boy named Jock, who lives at the farm with his mother and stepfather, the farm owners. While exploring the moor, the Five find a railway yard and a tunnel that are apparently abandoned. A watchman called Wooden Leg Sam tells them that "Spook trains" travel along those tracks before chasing them away.
The children visit the farm the next day and tell Jock about the spook trains. They are surprised to find that most of the farm labourers are not working properly although Jock's stepfather, Mr Andrews, has supplied the farm with a lot of expensive equipment and vehicles. When Mr Andrews hears about the spook trains, he warns the children to stay away from the railway yard, and tries to prevent Jock from meeting the Five over the next few days.
Julian and Dick secretly set off with Jock the next two nights to watch for the spook train, leaving the girls behind. They find that there is indeed a mysterious train coming from and back into the tunnel. George is infuriated when she finds that the boys have left them behind and goes off with Timmy, but accidentally falls inside the tunnel through a ventilation shaft and finds the train there. Meanwhile, the boys explore the tunnel while Anne waits outside, but are captured by some men led by Mr Andrews. Anne runs off to find Mr Luffy. George, who had been hiding inside the train, rescues the boys, and realising that the train is used for smuggling, they try to find a way out of the tunnel. They are recaptured, but Anne arrives with Mr Luffy and the police to free them. The criminals are arrested, and the Famous Five return to the farm, while Jock is delighted at the adventure.
Adaptations
Five Go Off to Camp was adapted for an episode of the Famous Five television series in 1978, produced by Southern Television for ITV. In 1996, another Famous Five television series featured the story, and was first aired on 29 July 1996. [3] The book has also been adapted for a radio drama.[ citation needed ]
