Lyddie is a 1991 novel by Katherine Paterson. Set in the 19th century, this is a story of determination and personal growth. When thirteen-year-old Lyddie and her younger brother are hired out as servants to help pay off their family's debts, Lyddie is determined to find a way to reunite her family.
LC Class
PZ7.P273 Ly 1991
Lyddie is a 1991 novel by Katherine Paterson . Set in the 19th century, this is a story of determination and personal growth. When thirteen-year-old Lyddie and her younger brother are hired out as servants to help pay off their family's debts, Lyddie is determined to find a way to reunite her family.
Plot summary
The novel begins as Lyddie, a 13 year old girl and her family are in their cabin, and a bear enters through the open door. Lyddie saves the family by staring down the bear long enough for her family to get up in the loft. The bear leaves with no one harmed, but some of their possessions broken. Lyddie has to do her father's duties because he left 3 years ago to join the gold rush. Lyddie's mother is slightly insane, and does not do her maternal duties, so Lyddie takes over the household. Lyddie's mother sees the bear as the devil, and decides to move in with her sister, Clarissa, and her husband, Judah. She takes Lyddie's younger siblings Rachel and Agnes with her, and offers to take Lyddie and her brother and friend Charlie with her, but they refuse. They want to stay at the farm because they believe their father will come back. While at the house, they receive a letter from their mother, telling them that she signed them up for jobs in the village. Charlie jokes about her horrible spelling, and "We can still hop" (instead of hope)becomes an inside joke for them.She learns how to weave and other things like e nice.
So, Lyddie is sent to work at Cutler's Tavern as a housemaid, and Charlie is sent to work at the Baker's mill. They are driven there by the Stenvens', a Quaker family, and Luke Stevens is very kind to Lyddie and Charlie. At the tavern, Lyddie is treated almost as a slave. The mistress there is cruel, but the cook, Triphena, is kind to Lyddie and they become friends. At the inn, she meets a fancily dressed guest who notices how hard Lyddie works. She tells Lyddie about high-paying jobs working on looms at mills in Lowell, Massachusetts. But she does not take the job, because her mother signed her up for the tavern job. When the mistress is away on a trip, Lyddie goes home. In her house she finds a runaway slave named Ezekial Abernathy that used to be a preacher . He educated himself, using mostly the bible, so Lyddie is surprised by how well he speaks. Before she leaves, she lends him the money she and Charlie received for a calf they sold. When she returns to the tavern, she is fired. Triphena gives her 5 dollars, but Lyddie insists that some day, she will pay her back.
Lyddie then works at a textile mill , to earn enough to pay the debt on her family's farm. At the mill, she is taken under the wing of Diana, a woman who is involved in the struggle for better conditions at the mill. She stays with her roommates at a boarding house specifically for mill workers. Amelia Cate, one of her roommates, is like a mother to them, making sure they do what is proper. Prudence Allen is another roommate, but Betsy is the most noticeable. Betsy likes to read novels, and reads Oliver Twist to Lyddie. Once the book is done, Lyddie wants to read it again, so she checks it out of the library and struggles to read it. Gradually, she becomes a better reader and speller, and she often copies pages and tapes them to her loom to read in her spare time. Her mother sends her a letter saying her sister, Agnes, has died. Lyddie works very hard, and so when the supervisor picks up the pace of the looms, she stays when others, like Amelia and Prudence, fall behind and are fired or quit. Betsy stays on because she needs money to go to college like her brother. She wants to go to Oberlin college in Ohio, a college for girls. But, because of the bad factory conditions, she develops a horrible cough and has to go to the hospital, which uses up most of her money. After that, she leaves.
Luke Stevens comes with a letter from Ezekial Abernathy, which contains fifty dollars, more than enough to pay his debt to her. With all her roommates gone, Lyddie is now all alone in her room, but that changes when her uncle, Judah, drops off her sister Rachel. Also, he tells Lyddie that her mother is in an insane asylum and that they have to sell the farm to pay for her mother. Lyddie tries to stop him; all of her saving had been for the debts on the farm, which she is very attached to. But he remains firm in his decision to sell the farm.
No children besides people with jobs at the mill are supposed to be in the boarding house, but Lyddie convinces the mistress of the boarding house, Mrs. Bedlow, to let Rachel stay for two weeks. She writes to Charlie and tells him of Rachel and of the farm, but gets no reply.
She receives an offer of marriage from Luke Stevens, but is revolted by the letter,so she rips it up and puts it in the stove.
Rachel takes up a job at the mill as a doffer, but soon gets sick with a cough like Betsy's. Charlie comes to visit Lyddie, and says he will take Rachel with him to the Phinney family, who owns the mill where Charlie works and treats him like family. Lyddie reluctantly agrees, only because she didn't want the cough to get as bad as Betsy's.
Lyddie decides to sign a petition for better working conditions. When she is let go from the company for 'moral turpitude' (actually, she was only fired because she caught Mr. Marsden trying to rape another worker after hours and Mr.Marsden knew she would've alerted others, causing him to lose his job), she writes a letter to her supervisor, Mr. Marsden. She returns home briefly. Lyddie has thoughts about marrying Luke Stevens, but chooses instead to go to a college, Oberlin College, known for accepting women. The story ends with her thinking, "We can still hop, Luke Stevens."
Though the novel ends there, Lyddie later appears in Paterson's Jip, His Story .
