Land of Unreason is a fantasy novel written by Fletcher Pratt and L. Sprague de Camp. It was first published in the fantasy magazine Unknown Worlds for October, 1941. Revised and expanded, it was first published in book form by Henry Holt and Company in 1942. It has been reprinted numerous times since by various publishers, most notably by Ballantine Books in January 1970 as the tenth volume of the Ballantine Adult Fantasy series. An E-book edition was published by Gollancz's SF Gateway imprint on September 29, 2011 as part of a general release of de Camp's works in electronic form. It has also been translated into Italian.
ISBN
NA
Land of Unreason is a fantasy novel written by Fletcher Pratt and L. Sprague de Camp . It was first published in the fantasy magazine Unknown Worlds for October, 1941. Revised and expanded, it was first published in book form by Henry Holt and Company in 1942. It has been reprinted numerous times since by various publishers, most notably by Ballantine Books in January 1970 as the tenth volume of the Ballantine Adult Fantasy series . An E-book edition was published by Gollancz 's SF Gateway imprint on September 29, 2011 as part of a general release of de Camp's works in electronic form. [1] [2] It has also been translated into Italian .
a later paperback printing, Ballantine Books , 1970
Plot
Fred Barber, an American staying as a guest in an English country home during World War II, consumes a bowl of milk left as an offering for the fairies, substituting liquor in its place. The rightful recipient of the offering, drunk and offended at the substitution, takes vengeance by kidnapping Barber off to the Land of Faerie as a changeling, a fate normally reserved for infants. He finds Faerie beset by a menace echoing the war in his own world. Trapped in a magical realm where rationality as he knows it is turned upside-down and failure to follow the rules can have dire consequences, Barber undertakes a quest in the service of Oberon , the fairy king, in order to be returned to his own world. The outcome, befitting a realm in which nothing is as expected, is one that neither he nor the reader anticipates, for Fred Barber is not quite the man he thinks he is...
