Bella at Midnight is a fantasy novel for children by Diane Stanley. The story is based on the fairy tale Cinderella. It was first published in 2006.
You can help by adding to it .
(September 2013)
Bella
Bella is the daughter of Catherine and Sir Edward of Burning Wood. Upon her mother's death, her father orders her aunt Maud to get rid of her. She is raised by Martin the blacksmith and his family and becomes close friends with Prince Julian. Then Prince Julian betrays her after they go to a fair with all the pages he lives with. After he is sent to Brutanna as a hostage, on his way to apologize to Bella. Quickly afterward, her father summons her. She returns to Burning Wood, where she meets her father and new stepfamily. One day her stepsister Marianne brings the news that the king plans to attack Brutanna, endangering Prince Julian. Bella declares her intentions of warning him and her stepmother locks her in the storeroom. That night her stepsister Alice helps her escape. Bella warns Julian in time to save him, but couldn't prevent the battle. Instead she plays the part of the Worthy Knight, stopping the war forever. She is gravely wounded, but rescued by Prince Julian, who takes her back to her adoptive family and asks for her hand in marriage. She accepts.
Prince Julian of Moranmoor
Prince Julian is the fourth son of King Raymond. He was given to Beatrice until he was three, when he went to live with his uncle, but frequently returns to visit. He is instantly taken with Bella when introduced, and the two become close friends, until he snubs her in front of his peers.
He is on his way to apologize when a messenger stops him and informs him that he is to be a hostage to enforce a peace treaty Moranmoor and the neighboring kingdom Brutanna. He is living with the royal family when Bella comes to warn him of his brother's plot. He rides out to convince his brother to stop the attack, but the king accuses him of cowardice and takes him prisoner.
The battle begins, but is halted by the appearance of the Worthy Knight. Afterwards, unable to locate Bella, Julian sadly returns to Moranmoor to acts as regent for his brother, who was struck blind in the battle. He pays a visit to Burning Wood, where Alice shows him the Worthy Knight in her ring. They set off to find him and discover that "he" is actually Bella. They bring her back to reunite with her adoptive family, and Julian asks for her hand in marriage.
Maud
Maud is Bella's maternal aunt and godmother. She does everything in her power to help her goddaughter, including giving her supplies for her quest to rescue Prince Julian.
Matilda
Matilda is Bella's stepmother. She has become bitter ever since the death of her husband and loss of their wealth. She takes her anger out on her new husband and stepdaughter.
Marianne
Marianne is Bella's older stepsister. She is placed in court as the queen's lady-in-waiting by her aunt Basilia.
Alice
Alice is Bella's younger stepsister. Before her father left on his final voyage, he gave her a ring that allows her to see the whereabouts of any person. After her father's death she rarely speaks. Bella, however, helps her heal from the pain and in return Alice gives her the ring.
Lord Percy
Lord Percy is Basilia's husband. He is very wealthy, but reluctant to show charity to Matilda and her daughters, doing so only out of duty.
Basilia
Basilia is Matilda's sister. The two had a falling out when they were each married, and Basilia enjoys gloating over her sister's misfortune. However, she helps Marianne find a place at court.
King Harry of Brutanna
King Harry is the King of Brutanna, with which Moranmoor has been at war for over a hundred years. When the treaty for peace is signed and Prince Julian becomes a hostage, he treats the prince quite kindly. The King is attending his daughter Princess Marguerite's wedding when he is attacked by King Gilbert.
Martin
The adopted father of Bella who took care of Bella, Prince Julian, Will, and Margaret as babies.
Beatrice
The adopted mother of Bella who took care of Bella, Prince Julian, Will, and Margaret as babies.
Will and Margaret
The son and daughter of Beatrice and Martin. Bella thinks they are her siblings but soon finds out that they are not her family.
