Gregor and the Prophecy of Bane is a Fantasy novel, and the second book in the Underland Chronicles, written by Suzanne Collins.
4 References
Back of the Book Text
Months have passed since Gregor first fell into the strange Underland beneath New York City, and he swears he will never go back. But he is destined to be a key player in another prophecy, this one about and ominous white rat called the Bane. The Underlanders know there is only one way to lure Gregor back to their world: by kidnapping his little sister, Boots. Now Gregor's quest reunites him with his bondmate, Ares, and the rebellious princess, Luxa. They descend into the dangerous Waterway in search of the Bane, and Gregor knows what is at stake. If he does not fulfill the prophecy, his life, and the Underland
The Prophecy of Bane
If Under Fell, If Over Leaped,
If Life was Death, if Death Life Reaped,
Something Rises From the gloom
To Make The Underland A Tomb.
Hear It Scratching Down Below,
Rat Of Long-Forgotten Snow,
Evil Cloaked In Coat Of White
Will The Warrior Drain Your Light?
What Could Turn the Warrior Weak?
What Do Burning Gnawers Seek?
Just A Barely Speaking Pup
Who Holds The Land Of Under Up.
Die The Baby, Die His Heart,
Die His Most Essential Part.
Die The Peace That Rules The Hour.
Gnawers Have Their Key To Power.
Reception
Like the first book, Prophecy of Bane received Critical Acclaim. April Irick, an Amazon Book Critic praised the book, saying that, "The stories are dark... almost constant action. The dialogue is also great." Carl E. Ahlm of Amazon said, "I am impressed by the themes that are evolving in these books: violence and war, the lust for power, conflicts between "groups" who are "different," and thus, it speaks to tolerance. Collins fills the reader with angst, as the book is filled with intense emotions: deaths, traps, threats, betrayal, frustration, questionable alliances, compassion, and cruelty."
Geek Girls praised the novel, saying that "The world that Collins has created is amazing. She has managed to weave a tale in which creatures that are classically seen as evil or disgusting (rats, spiders, bats, etc) are seen as friends. Not an easy feat."
