And the Devil Will Drag You Under, (1979) is a comic fantasy by Jack Chalker involving an alcoholic demon and two humans he suborns to collect the pieces of a mystic artifact that the demon requires to save Earth from an asteroid on a collision course, thereby permitting him to continue his bender. The human's journeys include both mystical transformations of their bodies and trips to worlds that parodied famous fantasy novel locales. The book's title is an homage to "Sit Down, You're Rockin' the Boat", a song written by musical theatre composer-lyricist Frank Loesser, for Guys and Dolls in which the character Nicely-Nicely Johnson, making a gospel style confession at a Salvation Army prayer meeting, tells of a dream in which his fellow passengers, on a "little boat to heaven," warn him that if he upsets the ride, he'll be washed overboard ... "and the Devil will drag you under / By the sharp lapel of your checkered coat ... "
5337941
And the Devil Will Drag You Under, (1979) is a comic fantasy by Jack Chalker involving an alcoholic demon and two humans he summons to collect the pieces of a mystic artifact that the demon requires to save Earth from an asteroid on a collision course, thereby permitting him to continue his bender . The human's journeys include both mystical transformations of their bodies and trips to worlds that parodied famous fantasy novel locales.
The book's title is an homage to " Sit Down, You're Rockin' the Boat ", a song written by musical theatre composer-lyricist Frank Loesser , for Guys and Dolls in which the character Nicely-Nicely Johnson, making a gospel style confession at a Salvation Army prayer meeting, tells of a dream in which his fellow passengers, on a "little boat to heaven ," warn him that if he upsets the ride, he'll be washed overboard ... "and the Devil will drag you under / By the sharp lapel of your checkered coat ... "
Publication history
1979, USA, Del Rey ( ISBN 0-345-30504-3 ), pub date August, 1979.
This article about a fantasy novel is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
