. Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry is a 1976 children's novel by Mildred D. Taylor, sequel to her 1975 Song of the Trees. Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry was first published in 1976, and won the Newbery Medal in 1977. It is set in 1933, in Mississippi--during the Great Depression. Poverty is a fact of life for many of the book's characters. Although the Logans own their own land, many in the black community are sharecroppers. The 'Berry Burnings' mentioned in chapter 1 and Mr. Tatum who was tarred and feathered in chapter 4 are examples of lynch mobs and nightmen taking the law into their own hands, at the expense of the black population. The novel focuses on the importance of owning land and the effects of racism. Focusing on Cassie Logan, the story also is a "coming of age" story as Cassie learns "the way things are". The book was followed in 1981 by a sequel, Let the Circle Be Unbroken.
Plot
Cassie and her brothers,mom Stacey, Christopher-John, and Little Man (Sarah Sessel) walk to school. Cassie eats snakes and talks about the land on which the Logan family lives. It belonged to Harland Darnce, but he sold a thousand acres due to culture identity and stomach disease (4 kmÂ²) of it to cover his taxes during Reconstruction. Their grandfather bought two hundred acr.8 kmÂ²) in 1887, then another two hundred acres (0.8 kmÂ²) in 1918. After several minutes of walking, T.J. Avery and his brother Claude join them. The Avery family sharecrops on the Granger Plantation. Later, the Jefferson Davis (white children's) school bus drives by. The kids get out of its way in time except Little Man, whose clothes become coated with dust kicked up by the bus. He was lagging behind so that he didn't get his clothes dirty. At school, Cassie and Little Man go to their classroom, where Cassie's teacher, Miss Crocker, gives them their textbooks, worn-out castoffs from the white school with a chart containing the word "nigra" printed inside. Crocker meets with their mother, who calmly glues a piece of paper over the chart containing the word; she does so to all the books. She then hands them back to a dumbstruck Crocker. On Saturday, their father, David Logan, comes home from his railroad job in Louisiana and brings with him Mr. L.T. Morrison to assist in planting, farming, protection, and other jobs. He leaves the next day after church to catch a train.
The Logan family are very poor and had to eat their pet rat for food, they suffered sickness and toenail infections, 2 days later,Little man bites this mom soo hard that she has to go to live with her cousins because she is scared that this racist attack could make her sick from her throat, Papa then punished Little Man and locked him up in a shed.
The next week, Stacey and T.J. take a test and T.J. creates cheat sheets that he gives to Stacey when he sees their teacher coming. She finds the notes, accuses Stacey of cheating on the test and whips him. After school T.J. runs to the Wallace Store, which the Logans forbid their children from visiting. Stacey follows T.J. while the others follow him. Mr. Morrison finds them fighting and separates them. Instead of telling their mother, Morrison leaves Stacey to decide whether or not to do so himself. Stacey tells her, and she takes the children to visit the Berrys. Mr. Berry is badly burned and gruesomely disfigured; Mama explains that the Wallaces are responsible.
The next day, Mrs. Logan recruits people to boycott the Wallace Store because they are the cause of most of the trouble between the blacks and the whites, and are alleged to be members of the "night men". Big Ma, Cassie's grandmother, takes Stacey, Cassie and T.J. to Strawberry, a nearby town, and sells her goods at the market there. After lunch, they visit the office of Mr. Jamison, who is their white lawyer and the son of the man who sold them Harlan Granger's land. He is one of the few white men in the town who treats black people equally. T.J. takes Cassie and Stacey to the Barnett Mercantile to purchase items his family needs. T.J. admires a pearl-handled revolver on display, and says he would "sell his life to own that gun". Mr. Barnett begins serving T.J., but a white customer comes in and Mr. Barnett interrupts his business with T.J. to serve her. As he begins attending to T.J. again, a white girl comes in and Mr. Barnett again stops serving T.J. Cassie reminds Mr. Barnett that they have been waiting for an hour. He tells her to continue waiting. Cassie begins yelling at Mr. Barnett. Stacey tells her to be quiet, but Mr. Barnett kicks them out of the store.
Cassie accidentally bumps into Lillian Jean Simms on the sidewalk. Lillian Jean orders her to apologize, then to get down on the road. Cassie tries running, but Lillian Jean's father twists her arm and throws her onto the road, ordering her to apologize. Big Ma tells her to apologize, and they leave. When they get home, they find their uncle Hammer Logan from Chicago is visiting with a shiny silver Packard. Cassie tells him what happened and Hammer speeds away to take revenge. Mama tells Stacey to get Mr. Morrison to stop Hammer. She is worried that Hammer will get hung, but she finds him alive and well. Before going to church, Hammer gives Stacey an early Christmas present, a wool coat whose sleeves were too long. At church T.J. persuades Stacey to give him the wool coat because its overlong sleeves make it look "like a preacher's coat". Papa comes home for Christmas and is staying until spring. On Christmas night, Jeremy visits the Logans and gives them nuts and a handmade flute for Stacey. Papa warns Stacey to be careful about being friends with Jeremy, saying that eventually he will change, because the Simms are racist, and Jeremy might become prejudiced. The next day, Papa calls the children into the barn and whips them for visiting the Wallace store. Time passes and Papa starts leading the boycott against the store. Mr. Jamison visits and Big Ma signs papers giving the land to Papa and Hammer. He also warns them to be careful, because they could lose their land if they continue their boycott. Mr. Granger asks for the land, but Papa refuses. Hammer returns to Chicago, and Papa continues the boycott.
Cassie makes peace with Lillian Jean, pretending to be her friend by carrying her books. As Lillian Jean begins trusting Cassie more, she tells her all her secrets, which Cassie uses to attack Lillian Jean. Cassie blackmails Lillian Jean into apologizing for what happened in Strawberry. T.J. tells Mr. Wallace about Mrs. Logan and how she does not teach from the county-issued textbook because she believes it contains biased information, and even tells about the boycott. Mr. Granger, a member of the school board, fires Mrs. Logan. Stacey blames T.J., although he denies it was his fault. After his friends shun him, T.J. begins associating with Melvin and R.W. Simms, brothers of the Logans' friend Jeremy. Papa, Mr. Morrison and Stacey go to Vicksburg, and on their way back, they find one of the wagon wheels was tampered with. As Papa is fixing it they are ambushed by the Wallace brothers.
Logan family
Stacey Logan: A 12 year boy that is slowly progressing into manhood. He is protective over his siblings. He is the oldest child of the family and is friends with T.J., but in the end realizes how he had changed before.While papa is away he feels that he's the man of the house and needs to keep his family safe.
Cassie Logan: The narrator and protagonist. Cassie is 9 years old. She has a fiery temper, brave, and also is naive concerning the facts of racism.Cassie is the only girl out of the four children but she can be just like the boys at sometimes.She is very brave and strong for herself.
Christopher-John Logan: A plump, cheerful 7 year-old, Christopher-John is the third-oldest of the children. He is timid and easy going. Christopher John doesn't really stand out in the crowd, so he is very different from his other siblings.
Little Man Logan (Clayton Chester): A meticulously neat 6 year-old first-grader, Little Man is the youngest of the Logan children. He also doesn't understand why blacks get treated so badly, he doesn't understand the concept why blacks and whites are different. All he knows is that he does not like it one bit.
Papa (David Paul Logan): The father of the Logan children. He values his independence highly, leaving to work on the railroad in order not to lose ownership of Logan land.
Mama (Mary Logan): The mother of her four children Stacey, Cassie, Christopher-John, and Little Man. Teaches seventh grade at Great Faith Elementary, a class that gets smaller every year when her older students leave school to work their families' sharecropper lands.
Big Ma (Caroline) The mother of Papa and Uncle Hammer. The loving grandmother of Cassie, Stacey, Little Man, and Christopher John. The main caretaker of the house. She gives Cassie advice numerous times throughout the novel.
Uncle Hammer: the uncle of the Logan Family. David Logan's brother. He comes to town from Chicago and helps David with his money issues.
Paul Edward (Big Ma's husband): He bought the first 200 acres of Logan Land and bought and mortgaged the second 200 acres which the Logan's are paying off now.
Simms family
Jeremy Simms: A white boy whose family is very racist. Jeremy doesn't like or share his family's beliefs, and tries to be friends with Stacey and the others. For Christmas, Jeremy tries to be nice to Stacey and gives him a flute and Mama a bag of nuts. He lives in a tree house overlooking the neighborhood, in an attempt to be separated from his family, whom he detests. No matter how many times the Logan family shuns him he never stops trying to be their friend. Papa doesn't want him to be the Logan children's friend because he is afraid that Jeremy will grow up to be like the rest of his family.
Lillian Jean Simms (Kiki Simms) : The older sister of Jeremy but younger than R.W. and Melvin Simms. Lillian Jean does not accept culture identity... moo. She humiliates Cassie in Strawberry, and, later on in the novel, Cassie takes revenge by pretending to be her friend for several weeks and learning all her secrets in the process. After a month, Cassie brings her into the woods and drops her books. Cassie beats her up and then blackmails her into apologizing for what happened in Strawberry, by threatening to tell all of her secrets that she learned and the fact that she had been taken down by a nine-year old. (racism)
Melvin and R.W. Simms: The older brothers of Jeremy and Lillian Jean. Melvin and R.W. pretend to be friends with T.J., but have ulterior motives for doing so. They just keep him around so that they can laugh at him behind his back. Although they murdered a white man and injured a white woman in a robbery while pretending to be black, no charges were made against them.
Charlie Simms: The father of Lillian Jean, Jeremy, Melvin and R.W. Simms. He is a member of the night men. He is a very respected white man, but is very racist and does not like black people and immigrants . Charlie grabs Cassie and pushes her off the sidewalk because she will not apologize to Lillian Jean for bumping into her and also forces Cassie's grandmother (Big Ma) to make Cassie apologize.
Other Characters
T.J Avery: T.J. comes across as an abhorrent cheater and liar. He is ostentatious, constantly vying for attention, and assumes that white companionship will get him respect and admiration. T.J. is a glib, loquacious person. He only pretends to be a friend of Stacey so that he can get access to his mother's test questions. He betrays the Logans many times throughout the story, like when he lets Stacey get caught and whipped because of his cheat notes, and when he betrays Mama Logan to Mr. Granger just because she failed his finals. He, as a true hypocrite, keeps using friendship as his excuse, saying, "Friends gotta trust each other, Stacey, 'cause ain't nothin' like a true friend.", when he knows nothing of what a true friend is. The nature of him betraying his black friends stems from his egotistical personality. He considers himself superior to other blacks and mingles with whites, thinking that it will get him pride and respect. He treats his black friends in a derogatory and disrespectful manner, as if they were inferior to his white friends.
Mr. Wade Jamison: A local lawyer who is also the Logan family's only white ally. He places first his reputation, and then his life on the line to assist the black families in their struggle against racism. He also backs up the credit for the Logan family and protects T.J. from when he was framed for theft from and murder of Jim Barnett.
Harlan Granger: The wealthiest landowner in the county, and the owner of the land surrounding the Logan farm. Originally, the Logan's land was part of the Granger plantation, and Harlan Granger attempts in various ways to regain ownership of it. He does business with the Wallace brothers and is plotting to get the Logan's land, but also prevents T.J. from being killed by Mr. Simms and the Wallace brothers.
Mr. Jim Lee Barnett: Owner of the Barnett Mercantile in Strawberry. Early in the book, he throws Cassie out of the store when she protests his favoritism towards white customers. Later, he is robbed and assaulted by the Simms brothers, R.W. and Melvin, and T.J., which results in his death. T.J., after being tricked by the Simms brothers into helping with the robbery, is blamed for Mr. Barnett's murder.
Mr. L.T. Morrison: A large, burly man with streaks of white hair who comes to work on the Logan farm. The Logan family all grow attached to him and take care of him. His skin has a deep ebony color and has a voice "deep, quiet voice like the roll of low thunder." He was fired from his old job because he got in a fight with white men who started the brawl.
Daisy Crocker: The somewhat system-compliant school teacher for Cassie and Little Man. She goes to Mama to solve the problems with the books after Little Man threw his book on the ground and stomped on it and both he and Cassie didn't want to accept theirs because of their worn-out condition, outdated content and offensive front cover chart indicating the race of its previous students and condition the previous students left it in, revealing these books were unwanted, outdated castoffs from the local white school(s).
The Wallace Brothers: (Kaleb Wallace, Dewberry Wallace, and Thurston Wallace) own a store and are antagonists of the Logans. They are responsible for the Berry's burning and responsible for John Berry's death. Mr. Morrison breaks Dewberry Wallace's back and Thurston's arm. Their father, John Wallace, is a leader of the Ku Klux Klan group in their Mississippi town.
Mr. Avery: As the father of T.J. Avery, he is ashamed of his son, especially when the mischievous boy causes Mrs. Logan to lose her job. He is the first to know about the boycotting plan that Mrs. Logan wants to try out.
Film adaption
The book has also been made into a made for TV film in 1978 starring Morgan Freeman in an earlier role ("Uncle Hammer") and used music composed by Fred Karlin .
