Tales of a Fourth Grade Nothing is a children's novel written by Judy Blume in 1972. It is the first of the "Fudge books". It was followed by Superfudge, Fudge-a-Mania and, most recently, Double Fudge. Although Otherwise Known as Sheila the Great features many of the same characters as the series, it does not fit exactly in the continuity of it because it only focuses on Peter's classmate (who later becomes his cousin), Sheila Tubman. Originally, the book featured illustrations by Roy Doty, but all post 2002 reprints of the book have omitted the pictures. The story focuses on a nine-year-old boy named Peter Warren Hatcher and his relationship with his two-year-old brother Farley Drexel "Fudge" Hatcher. Farley hates the sound of his legal name, and prefers Fudge for any and all occasions.
Plot summary
The book chronicles nine-year-old Peter Hatcher's infuriation with the horrendous behavior demonstrated by his bratty little brother Fudge, which frequently goes unpunished. Peter becomes frustrated with Fudge because he often disturbs Dribble, Peter's pet turtle which Peter won at his friend's birthday party. Furthermore, his little brother throws nonstop temper tantrums, conducts an unexplained abstinence from eating, and emulates his brother's behavior, throwing tantrums if it is prohibited. Nevertheless, their parents dote on Fudge, to Peter's anger.
For months, Fudge's antics continue; vandalizing Peter's group assignment, breaking his front teeth after catapulting himself from the jungle gym at the local playground when he decides to fly, and taking off on his family at a movie theater. However, one day, to Peter's absolute misery, he returns home to discover Dribble's disappearance from his bowl, Fudge claiming to have swallowed him. These proclamations prove to be correct, and they rush him to the hospital, where Dribble is safely extracted, to Mrs. Hatcher's relief. However, Peter is incredibly devastated over the loss of his beloved pet, albeit his parents sympathetically compensate by adopting a dog, which Peter appropriately names "Turtle" in memory of Dribble.
Main article: List of Fudge series characters
Fudge — Peter's younger brother, whom he often resents. At the beginning of the book, Fudge (a nickname for his much-despised legal name, Farley) is 2 years old, and turns 3 in Chapter 5. Fudge has a very active imagination, and others - including Sheila Tubman and the wife of one of his father's clients - often adore him. Peter believes that Fudge causes trouble for him and believes that his parents show him preferential treatment; he also is frequently frustrated when Fudge gets into his things and tries to become involved in his activities. However, Peter does love his little brother very much and shows concern when he is hospitalized (after swallowing Peter's turtle whole) and the doctors speculate that they may need to operate on him.
Peter — The protagonist of the story, and a smart, assertive, but seemingly naive 9-year-old. Most of the novel focuses upon his relationship with Fudge, the fact that he is the perceived source of his troubles and that his parents seem to let Fudge get away with anything and everything...something that Peter would later realize was not always true. Peter's relationships with his classmates Jimmy Fargo (his best friend) and Sheila Tubman (a classmate who antagonizes Peter and vice versa) are also explored in the novel.
Anne Hatcher — The mother of Peter and Fudge, and wife of Warren. A caring mother, she shows love and devotion to her family, and is very protective of Fudge. Her sometimes over-protective ways with Fudge sometimes causes problems for Peter; for example, when Fudge jumps off a jungle gym at the playground (believing he is a bird that will land safely), she yells at Peter, holding him solely responsible. However, she is quick to apologize for her snap judgments.
Warren Hatcher — The father of Peter and Fudge, and husband of Anne. He works at an unnamed advertising agency, whose major clients in Tales are with Juicy-O (a fruit beverage that the Hatchers find rather noxious-tasting) and Toddle Bike (a manufacturer of plastic toy tricycles a la the Big Wheel and Green Machine); Fudge is hired for a commercial for the latter product. Although most of Warren's clients are happy with his work and company, he also had his share of failures, such as losing the Juicy-O account. A loving father who wants what is best for his family, he is more conservative in rearing his sons than Anne, particularly with Fudge. For example at one point in the novel, when Fudge was going through a stage where he refused to eat at the table, he dumped a bowl of Corn Flakes over his head. Fudge commences eating, once again, after the cereal incident.
Jimmy Fargo — Peter's best friend. He and Peter hang around together, but share an equal dislike for classmate Sheila Tubman. Jimmy, at times, seems to resent Fudge and is glad that he is an only child. The novel does not state that he is of African-American origin. In the TV series, however, he is portrayed by a black actor.
Sheila — Classmate of Peter and Jimmy, who lives with her family in the same apartment building as the Hatchers. Peter is annoyed at the very thought of Sheila, considering her to be a bossy know-it-all who still has cooties (a sort of imaginary lice). At times, Sheila does assert herself by trying to control a school project she, Peter, and Jimmy were assigned to work on together (although their efforts are rewarded with an "A"). Sheila is sometimes allowed to help babysit Fudge. She has an older sister named Libby. It is hinted at, however briefly, that Sheila may have a slight crush on Peter, although because of their bickering it is not evident.
