The Rolling Stones (also published under the name Space Family Stone in the United Kingdom) is a 1952 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein. A condensed version of the novel had been published earlier in Boys' Life (September, October, November, December 1952) under the title "Tramp Space Ship". It was published in hardcover that year by Scribner's as part of the Heinlein juveniles.
Plot summary
The Stones, a family of "Loonies" (residents of the Moon , known as "Luna" in Latin), purchase and rebuild a used spaceship, and go sightseeing around the solar system .
The twin teenage boys, Castor and Pollux, buy used bicycles to sell on Mars , their first stop, where they run afoul of import regulations and are freed by their grandmother Hazel Stone . While on Mars, the twins buy their brother Buster a native Martian creature called a flat cat , born pregnant and producing a soothing vibration, as a pet.
In the Asteroid Belt , where the equivalent of a gold rush is in progress prospecting for radioactive ores, the twins obtain supplies and luxury goods, on grounds that shopkeepers are much likelier to be rich than miners. En route, the flat cat and its offspring overpopulate the ship, so that the family place them in hibernation , and later sell them to the miners. Subsequently, the family set out to see the rings of Saturn .
Research
Heinlein and his wife Virginia spent hours in research, fiercely dedicated to getting it right for their readers. [1]
Influences
Heinlein later credited the 1905 Ellis Parker Butler short story " Pigs is Pigs " with informing the flat cat incident. A similar concept and plotline appeared in the Star Trek episode " The Trouble With Tribbles ". According to screenwriter David Gerrold , the show's producers noticed similarities in the two stories and asked Heinlein for permission to use the idea. [2] Heinlein asked for an autographed copy of the script, but otherwise did not object, noting that both stories owed something to the Butler story "and possibly to Noah ". [3]
Connections to other Heinlein works
This book makes reference to Hazel Stone as an influential figure in the Lunar Revolution. Fourteen years later, Heinlein published The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , which tells the story of that conflict, including the small but vital role that Hazel Stone played as a child. Hazel, Castor, and Pollux reappear in The Number of the Beast and The Cat Who Walks Through Walls . Hazel, alone, appears in To Sail Beyond the Sunset .
Dr. Lowell Stone ("Buster") is quoted in interstitial material in The Cat Who Walks Through Walls and referenced as Chief Surgeon at Ceres General. In that same book, Hazel states that Roger and Edith are now living in the extrasolar colony known as Fiddler's Green (itself first named in Friday ).
The generic description of the Martian met by Lowell is similar to the description of the Martians depicted in Stranger in a Strange Land and Red Planet .
Reception
Groff Conklin described the novel as "a thoroughly delightful job". [4] Boucher and McComas praised it as "easily the most plausible, carefully detailed picture of an interplanetary future we will encounter in any year". [5] P. Schuyler Miller cited the novel's "freshness and simplicity," characterizing it as "a life-size portrait-gallery of real people living in a real world of the future, every detail of which fits into place with top-tolerance precision". [6]
Surveying Heinlein's juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized Heinlein's story as "a dream of personal freedom" written with "an enviable craftsmanship", noted that the novel "carries its thematic burden tightly", unlike Heinlein's later adult novels, and praised The Rolling Stones for its "sense of an accurately extrapolated future background, with all of the new technologies given an air of commonplace reality". [7]
