Knight Life, is an Arthurian fantasy novel by Peter David. The book was first published in 1987, and an expanded, updated edition of the book was published by Ace Books in 2002.
Plot summary
(The following summary is based on the 2002 rewrite.)
In a rundown apartment in New Jersey , Morgan Le Fay has finally decided to end her own life . Although kept immortal by magic, she has become apathetic , elderly, and corpulent, and sees no point in continuing with her life. Before cutting her wrist with a steak knife, she decides to look in on her old nemesis , Merlin 's prison, one last time, and is surprised to see that he has escaped. Given a reason to live again, she laughs triumphantly.
In Manhattan , King Arthur appears on the streets in full medieval armor, which he quickly divests in favor of a tailored suit (thanks to an American Express card that appears in his pocket by magic). He then walks into Central Park , where the Lady of the Lake rises from the pond and gives him Excalibur .
Setting up an office under the name "Arthur Penn" (short for Pendragon ), Arthur reunites with Merlin , who advises him that the world needs a leader like him, so Arthur decides to enter politics , beginning with announcing his candidacy for Mayor of New York City.
Two versions
The original version of the book sold decently, but was not a runaway best seller.[ citation needed ] During his efforts to bring the book to the big screen, Peter David grew more and more dissatisfied with what he considered to be an amateur novel. He was also concerned with how dated the story seemed, with anachronisms such as an office filled with clattering typewriters and an almost non-existent Republican presence in New York City mayoral politics. Because he had updated and expanded the story when writing a screenplay version of it during one of the numerous times it was optioned to be adapted into a film, he decided to rewrite the novel, incorporating aspects from the screenplay version, and bringing it more into line with how his writing style developed over the years. Whereas the original edition contained 65,000 words, the 2002 edition contains 95,000. [1]
