For the Unknown Instructors album, please refer to "The Way Things Work (album)" The Way Things Work {{#invoke:InfoboxImage|InfoboxImage|image=File:Way things work. jpg|size=|sizedefault=frameless|alt=|border=|suppressplaceholder=yes}}Book cover for The Way Things WorkAuthor(s) Neil ArdleyCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) EducationalPublisher Houghton MifflinPublication date 1988Pages 400ISBN 0-395-42857-2OCLC Number 17917341Dewey Decimal 600 19LC Classification T47 .M18 1988 The Way Things Work is a book by Neil Ardley, illustrated by David Macaulay. It is intended to serve as an entertaining introduction to everyday machines. It covers machines as simple as levers and gears and as complicated as radio telescopes and automatic transmissions. Its most notable feature is its illustrations: every page consists primarily of one or more large diagrams describing the operation of the relevant machine. These diagrams are informative but playful; most feature the internal workings of the machines being operated by woolly mammoths. The book's concept was later developed into a short-lived animated TV show (produced by Millimages and distributed by Schlessinger Media), a Dorling Kindersley interactive CD-ROM, and a board game. A family "ride" involving animatronics and a 3-D film based on the book was one of the original attractions at the San Francisco Metreon, but closed in 2001.
LC Class
T47 .M18 1988
The Way Things Work is a book by Neil Ardley , illustrated by David Macaulay . It is intended to serve as an entertaining introduction to everyday machines . It covers machines as simple as levers and gears and as complicated as radio telescopes and automatic transmissions . Its most notable feature is its illustrations: every page consists primarily of one or more large diagrams describing the operation of the relevant machine. These diagrams are informative but playful; most feature the internal workings of the machines being operated by woolly mammoths . The book's concept was later developed into a short-lived animated TV show (produced by Millimages [1] and distributed by Schlessinger Media ), a Dorling Kindersley interactive CD-ROM, and a board game . A family "ride" involving animatronics and a 3-D film based on the book was one of the original attractions at the San Francisco Metreon , but closed in 2001.
Contents
