Ninth Key is a novel written by Meg Cabot for teenagers and young adults. It is the second book of The Mediator series. Its alternative title is High Stakes.
Plot summary
Ninth Key begins with Suze contracting a poison oak rash on her hands after falling into a clump of it at a pool-party of one of her peers, Kelly Prescott. At the party, Suze dances with 'Tad', a student at a local school.
That night,when Suze is asleep, a ghost woman starts yelling hysterically. The woman asks Suze to tell "Red" that he did not kill her. Suze does not know who this woman is, or who "Red" is, but the ghost disappears before she has the chance to ask. Suze asks around to see if anyone knows who Red might be and is informed by her friend, Cee Cee, that a local businessman called Thaddeus Beaumont goes by that name.
Suze tries and fails to get in contact with Mr Beaumont. She then encounters the spirit of a boy named Timothy, who tells her his parents abandoned his cat, Spike. Suze promises to find the animal and get him a good home.
With the pretense that she is there as a reporter for the school paper, Suze goes to Mr. Beaumont's mansion and meets him. She delivers the ghost's message, saying the woman appeared in a dream. Mr Beaumont seems only interested that he wasn't the cause of the woman's death and that Suze was able to speak to her. Mr Beaumont is eager to get Suze to summon the spirits of other people he says he has killed. Disconcerted, Suze tries to leave, only to find that the elevator won't open and the windows are barred.
Mr Beaumont's brother Marcus arrives and escorts her out, asking if Mr Beaumont harmed her. They encounter Tad, Mr Beaumont's son. Recognizing her from the pool party, Tad offers to give Suze a ride home.
As Suze leaves the estate, Tad invites her to go have a coffee. Suze agrees and when he drops her off, they start kissing in the car. Jesse shows up in the backseat to prevent Suze from going "forward" with Tad. Suze screams when she sees Jesse and tears into the house, leaving Tad alone.
When Susannah explains what happened to Father Dominic, her principal and fellow mediator, he thinks that the strangeness of Mr Beaumont's behavior could be that he is a vampire. Several days later, Suze retrieves Spike, Timothy's cat, from a field and keeps him in her room. Cee Cee, who researched Mr. Beaumont after Suze asked her to, discovers disappearances linking to the production companies of Mr Beaumont. Cee Cee finds a picture of one of the missing women, Mrs Fiske, and Suze thinks it looks like the woman who appeared in her bedroom.
Adam, a friend of CeeCee and Suze, takes them to Cee Cee's aunt's house. Cee Cee dislikes "Aunt Pru" as she is a fortune-teller. Adam tells Aunt Pru of Suze's "dream" and Aunt Pru tries to summon Mrs Fiske using Tarot cards. Mrs Fiske shows up in spirit form and confirms that "Mr Beaumont" killed her. However, Suze realizes Mrs Fiske is not the woman who asked her to pass on the message.
Mr Beaumont and Tad invite Suze for dinner at the house. At the house, Mr Beaumont drugs Tad and tries to talk to her about her psychic abilities. Suze, frightened because she believes Mr Beaumont is a vampire, stabs him in the chest with a pencil but fails to kill him. Marcus tells Suze to never return and not speak of Mr Beaumont's so-called vampirism, which he says is an illness. Suze later receives a phone call from Tad and argues with him. She tells Tad about his dad's illness, but Tad denies this. Suze suggests he ask Marcus where his money comes from.
The next morning, Suze is captured by Marcus and two thugs. She fights hard to escape but Marcus forces her into Mr Beaumont's office, telling her to change into a swimsuit, and leaves; he plans to kill her by sending her and Tad into the ocean on a boat during a storm. Suze smashes the aquarium in the office when Marcus returns to check on her. Suze pulls the bulb out of one of the aquarium lights and throws the cord with frayed wires into the water Marcus is walking through, electrocuting him. As the building catches fire, Jesse, the ghost who often inhabits Suze's bedroom, appears, claiming Susannah "called" him, and breaks the window shutters to allow Tad and Suze to escape the burning building. Marcus is missing after the incident.
Suze returns home but is grounded by her parents as she is unable to tell them the full story. Red turns out to be the nickname of Suze's stepbrother Doc, and the ghost is Doc's mother. Suze tells Doc what his mother wished for him to know, as well as telling him that she is a mediator. Brad walks into his step-sister's bedroom, discovering Spike, the cat, and tells her she is "busted" because Suze is not allowed to have a cat.
