How to Stop Worrying and Start Living is a self-help book by Dale Carnegie. It was first printed in Great Britain in 1948 by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press), Ltd. , Bungay Suffolk (S.B.N. 437 95083 2). It is currently published as a Mass Market Paperback of 352 pages by Pocket, ISBN 0-671-73335-4. Carnegie says in the preface to How to Stop Worrying and Start Living that he wrote it because he "was one of the unhappiest lads in New York". He said that he made himself sick with worry because he hated his position in life, which he attributes to wanting to figure out how to stop worrying. The book's goal is to lead the reader to a more enjoyable and fulfilling lifestyle, helping them to become more aware of, not only themselves, but others around them. Carnegie tries to address the everyday nuances of living, in order to get the reader to focus on the more important aspects of life.
Fundamental Facts You Should Know About Worry
Live in "Day-tight Compartments"
Prepare to accept the worst
keep calm and try to make it the best
Remind yourself of the exorbitant price you can pay for worry in terms of your health
Basic Techniques In Analyzing Worry
Get all the facts
Weigh all the facts - then come to a decision
Once a decision is reached, act!
Write out and answer the following questions
What is the problem?
What are the causes of the problem?
What are the possible solutions?
What is the best possible solution?
How to Break the Worry Habit Before It Breaks You
Keep busy
Use the law of averages to outlaw your worries
Cooperate with the Inevitable
Decide just how much anxiety a thing may be worth and refuse to give it more
Don't worry about the past
Seven Ways to Cultivate A Mental Attitude That Will Bring You Peace and Happiness
Fill your mind with thoughts of peace, courage, health, and hope
Never try to get even with your enemies
Expect ingratitude
Count your blessings, not your troubles
Find Yourself and Be Yourself (Remember There Is No One Else on Earth Like You)
Try to profit from your losses
Create happiness for others
The Perfect Way to Conquer Worry
Pray
How To Keep From Worrying About Criticism
Remember that unjust criticism is often a disguised compliment
Do the very best you can
Analyze your own mistakes and criticize yourself
Six Ways to Prevent Fatigue and Worry and Keep Your Energy and Spirits High
Rest before you get tired
Learn to relax at your work
Protect your health and appearance by relaxing at home
Four Good Working Habits That Will Help Prevent Fatigue and Worry
Clear your desk of all the papers except those relating to the immediate problem at hand
Do things in the order of their importance
When you face a problem, solve it then and there if you have the facts necessary to make a decision
Learn to organize, deputize, and supervise
Put enthusiasm into your work
Don't worry about insomnia
"How I Conquered Worry"
Six Major Troubles Hit Me All At Once - C. I. Blackwood
I Can Turn Myself into a Shouting Optimist within an Hour - Roger W. Babson
How I Got Rid of an Inferiority Complex - Elmer Thomas
Five Methods I Have Used to Banish Worry - Prof. William Lyon Phelps
I Stood Yesterday. I Can Stand Today - Dorothy Dix
I Did Not Expect to Live to See the Dawn - J. C. Penney
I Go to the Gym to Punch the Bag or Take a Hike Outdoors - Col. Eddie Eagan
I Was "The Worrying Wreck from [Virginia Tech]" - Jim Birdsall
I Have Lived by This Sentence - Dr. Joseph R. Sizoo
I Hit Bottom and Survived - Ted Ericksen
I Used to Be One of the World's Biggest Jackasses - Percy H. Whiting
I Have Always Tried to Keep My Line of Supplies Open - Gene Autry
I Heard A Voice in India - E. Stanley Jones
When the Sheriff Came in My Front Door - Homer Croy
The Toughest Opponent I ever Fought Was Worry - Jack Dempsey
I Prayed to God to Keep Me Out of an Orphan's Home - Kathleen Halter
My Stomach Was Twisting Like a Kansas Whirlwind - Cameron Shipp
I Learned to Stop Worrying by Watching My Wife Wash Dishes - Rev. William Wood
Time Solves a Lot of Things! - Louis T. Montant, Jr
I Was Warned Not to Try to Speak or to Move Even A Finger - Joseph L. Ryan
I Am a Great Dismisser - Ordway Tead
If I Had Not Stopped Worrying, I Would Have Been in My Grave Long Ago - Connie Mack
I Got Rid of Stomach Ulcers and Worry by Changing My Job and My Mental Attitude - Arden W. Sharpe
I Now Look for the Green Light - Joseph M. Cotter
How John D. Rockefeller Lived on Borrowed Time for Forty-Five Years
I Was Committing Slow Suicide Because I Didn't Know How to Relax - Paul Sampson
How Benjamin Franklin Conquered Worry
I Was So Worried I Didn't Eat A Bite of Solid Food for Eighteen Days - Kathryne Holcombe Farmer
