The Artemis Fowl Files (208 pages total) is a companion book to the Artemis Fowl series written by Eoin Colfer. It contains two short stories, one about Captain Holly Short joining LEPrecon, and the second about Mulch Diggums and Artemis Fowl working together to steal a tiara. There are also interviews with the main characters such as Artemis Fowl, Holly Short and the author, Eoin Colfer. It also includes several extra activities and bits of information, including a Gnommish alphabet table, a fairy quiz, a spotter's guide to fairies, Artemis Fowl's report card, fairy transport locations, a guide to Foaly's inventions, a crossword puzzle, and a word search.
Plot Summary
Artemis Fowl lures Mulch Diggums , a dwarf, to work with him to steal a tiara for a laser he is developing. A band of other dwarfs, using a circus as their cover have already stolen the tiara. The other dwarfs, led by Sergei the Significant, are planning to sell it to a jewellery fence. Captain Holly Short is on a break pending a tribunal after the Fowl Manor Incident , but Foaly tells her that the LEP have been alerted by Mulch Diggum's stolen helmet, about Artemis Fowl. Holly immediately heads to Ireland and confronts the dwarfs. Soon after Holly has tagged all of the dwarfs in Sergei's band, she chases Artemis and Mulch. Mulch and Artemis soon split with Artemis promising to write Mulch a cheque for the tiara. Holly chases after Artemis and demands the tiara and a LEP helmet from him. Artemis gives her the LEP helmet but keeps the tiara. Holly forces Artemis to give her the tiara, and then he hands it over. Later on we learn that Artemis switched the gemstone in the tiara with a fake one. He gives the real one to his mother because it reminds her of Artemis's father , specifically, the color of his eyes.
LEPrecon
LEPrecon is a short story prequel included as part of The Artemis Fowl Files, written by Eoin Colfer. It was reprinted in certain editions of The Time Paradox and serves as backstory to the plot of The Atlantis Complex .
Plot Summary
To join LEPrecon and become its first female member LEPtraffic officer Holly Short has to hunt and tag Commander Julius Root with a paintball gun on a remote island while being filmed for evaluation by Trouble Kelp. Unknown to them Commander Root's criminal brother Turnball Root has set up a trap for his sibling.
Report Card
On pages 98 and 99, there is a report card from Saint Bartleby's School for Young Gentlemen with teachers' comments for Language Arts, Mathematics, Social Studies, Science, and Social & Personal Development. All of Artemis's teachers, however, complain about how he interrupts, or refuses to socialise with the rest of the boys, enclosing that they request a pass for him next year to excuse him from their class.
