Stranger With My Face is a young adult horror novel by Lois Duncan, first published in 1981. It was adapted into a television film of the same name. The book is about a girl named Laurie Stratton who finds out that there is a duplicate of herself since her family and boyfriend saw her in places where she wasn't. As the story progresses Laurie is contacted by the stranger and finds out that she is Laurie's twin. Laurie's twin, Lia, tells her that she can appear to her by using astral projection. Lia teaches her how to astrally project so they can meet. Laurie asks her "mother" about having a twin. She has always felt different and doesn't look anything like her family. Her mother denies everything but eventually admits that Laurie is adopted. People close to Laurie start to have accidents and Laurie suspects Lia is responsible. She discovers that Lia is in a mental hospital after having killed her last foster parent's daughter. Laurie asks her mother why she didn't adopt her twin also, and her mother tells her that when she picked up the other twin she felt cold and revolted. There was something not right about the twin so they only adopted Laurie. Eventually, Laurie becomes able to astrally project. However, on one occasion she finds herself unable to return to her body. As she hovers over her body she sees it rise and begin to move around. She realizes that it is Lia inside her body. She then battles to find a way to get Lia to leave her body so that she can return to it. It was re-issued in an updated form in 2011.
Pages
252
Stranger With My Face is a young-adult horror novel by Lois Duncan , first published in 1981. [1] It was adapted into a television film . The book is about a girl named Laurie Stratton whose boyfriend and family members start seeing her in places where she knows she wasn't, even couldn't have been at times.
As the story progresses Laurie is contacted by the stranger and finds out "Lia" is her identical twin sister; their mother gave them up at birth and later reclaimed the unadopted Lia. Lia, tells Laurie that she can appear to her by using astral projection, and teaches her how to astrally project so they can meet. Laurie, who doesn't look anything like her family, asks her mother if she is adopted or has a twin; eventually her mother admits not only that they couldn't afford to adopt both babies, but that the other baby gave off "bad vibes," so though both the Strattons and the adoption agents didn't agree with separating twins, the Strattons took baby Laurie with them and left the other baby behind. They later learned that the biological mother had reclaimed the other twin.
Laurie becomes able to astrally project. Meanwhile, people close to her start to have accidents. When Laurie, via the astral projection, finds out that Lia is in a mental hospital after having killed her last foster parents' daughter, she knows Lia is responsible for her friends' accidents. She then finds herself unable to return to her body; hovering over it she sees it rise and walk, and realizes that Lia's soul is inside it. She must then find about to get Lia out of her body so she can return to it.
It was re-issued in an updated form in 2011. [2]
