Cycle of Violence, also known as Crossmaheart, is the first stand-alone novel by Northern Irish author, Colin Bateman, released on 13 November 1995 through HarperCollins. The novel follows a journalist named Miller and his appointment in the hostile town of Crossmaheart; it was well received by reviewers. A movie adaptation has been made, named Crossmaheart also, and was featured in a number of film festivals.
Reception
In Cycle of Violence, Bateman delivers the same brand of dark comedy that made his debut novel, Divorcing Jack , a success on both sides of the Atlantic . The cycle refers to the bicycle that Miller, a wisecracking, hard-drinking newspaper reporter, is forced to use after he loses his driving license. The violence, well, the violence is everywhere.
“
Kevin Cullen, The Boston Globe [3]
The novel was well received, with reviewers praising Batemans encapsulation of Northern Ireland during a particularly hostile time and the humour which runs throughout the book despite this.
Jonathan Dyson, for The Independent , stated that "just as The Troubles seem finally to be ending, Colin Bateman is belatedly establishing himself as their greatest satirist "; and, of the book itself, "the resulting yarn is fast-paced, very black and very funny: Roddy Doyle meets Carl Hiaasen ". [8] Publishers Weekly called the novel "another side-splittingly funny, irreverent tale of violence", the finale of which they found to be "fascinating" and "devastating". They found "Bateman's forte is that, without directly addressing Northern Ireland's military / paramilitary confrontation, the book is drenched and reeking with the pervasive violence and fear of a war-torn state." The review continues that the "horror" of the situation "is cleverly framed with the blinding sparkle of dark Northern Irish wit - humor so black that it will have readers chuckling even while it reveals the dreadful realities that laughter pretends to camouflage". In conclusion, they found that "we probably learn more about life in Northern Ireland from this brilliant, often hilarious novel than from a year of Sunday magazine specials". [9] Kevin Cullen, for The Boston Globe , found that "Colin Bateman, who actually grew up and still lives in the place so many outsiders like to write about, has snatched the genre back with a vengeance, dreaming up scenarios that rely on the gallows humor peculiar to the natives of Northern Ireland"; stating also that "Only Bateman would look at the word "manslaughter" and see "man's laughter"". Cullen found that "Bateman's Vonnegut -like sense of absurdity is universal, and very funny" comparing the novel to Joseph Hellers Catch-22 in "serving up humor and pathos in equal proportions". He praised the fact that the "dialogue captures the perverse sense of humor that many people in Northern Ireland employ as a defense mechanism", stating in conclusion that "in Colin Bateman's world, the blind see and everybody dies. The reader, meanwhile, can't help but laugh". [3]
Kirkus Reviews were less effusive in their praise, finding Cycle of Violence to be "less manic - except for its luckless heroine - than Bateman's blackly comic debut, Divorcing Jack", finding that "Bateman and his hero both pay a high price for the few sweet, funny moments they wring out of this vale of tears". [10]
