The Golden Apples of the Sun is an anthology of 22 short stories (32 in the 1997 edition) by Ray Bradbury; it was first published in 1953. The book's namesake is one of the short stories in the collection. Bradbury drew the title for the story from the last line of the final stanza to W. B. Yeats' poem "The Song of Wandering Aengus" (1899): “ Though I am old with wandering Through hollow lands and hilly lands, I will find out where she has gone And kiss her lips and take her hands; And walk among long dappled grass, And pluck till time and times are done The silver apples of the moon, The golden apples of the sun. ” —W. B. Yeats, The Wind Among the Reeds The last three lines of the poem are included in the beginning of the book as well.
Derivative anthologies
In 1990, Bantam Books collected most of the stories from R Is for Rocket (1962) and the 1953 edition of The Golden Apples of the Sun into a semi-omnibus edition titled Classic Stories 1 . In 1997 Avon Books printed a new edition of the omnibus, titling it The Golden Apples of the Sun and Other Stories. Harper Perennial titled their 2005 edition as A Sound of Thunder and Other Stories.
Reception
Writing in The New York Times , Charles Poore reported that Bradbury "writes in a style that seems to have been nourished on the poets and fabulists of the Irish Literary Renaissance," praising him as being "wonderfully adept at getting to the heart of his story without talking all day long about it and around it." [1]
Reviewer Groff Conklin praised the original edition, saying it included "some of the best imaginative stories he [Bradbury] or anyone else has ever written. One cannot even begin to describe their delights." [2] Boucher and McComas , however, found Golden Apples to be a "most uncertain reading experience . . . material of a curiously mixed quality; writing that is often simply and perceptively moving [and] just as often sadly lacking any particular strength or color" [3] Imagination reviewer Mark Reinsberg, although praising Bradbury as "a gifted writer," complained that he had "a tendency to overestimate the power of style to nourish anemic themes." [4]
