I’m the King of the Castle is a novel written by Susan Hill, originally published in 1970. The French film Je suis le seigneur du château of 1989 and directed by Régis Wargnier is loosely based on the novel.
Plot summary
The book is set in a large house called Warings near the village of Derne. It was once a grand countryside mansion, but has since fallen into disrepair and decay. Joseph Hooper has inherited the house, and lives with his son Edmund Hooper. They have a cold, formal relationship which lacks compassion. Joseph announces that a housekeeper will be moving in, who will also bring her son who is of a similar age to Edmund. Mrs. Helena Kingshaw, and her son Charles Kingshaw arrive at Warings. The young boy, Edmund Hooper becomes defensive of his house, and instantly takes a disliking to Kingshaw. He mocks him about his social class and father, and a small fight ensues where Kingshaw punches Hooper. Kingshaw then attempts to escape Warings, but is attacked by a vicious crow. The crow is thought to symbolise Hooper, who is very protective of his territory. Animalistic symbolism is used throughout the novel. Hooper proceeds to taunt and bully Kingshaw, who acts as the weak victim in their relationship. They venture to Hang Wood together, where Hooper's weaknesses become apparent during a thunderstorm and Kingshaw seems to retrieve some kind of power. However, it is apparent that Kingshaw does not have the capacity to be cruel. During their time in Hang Wood they become lost, and are forced to stay the night in a little clearing with a river and pool. During this time Hooper nearly died as he fell and hit his head on a rock, which left him unconscious and bleeding though he eventually woke back up. This pattern of cruelty continues throughout the book within the isolated setting of Warings. Both parents seem oblivious to their fights, and lack an understanding of their children's antics. They travel to Hang Wood on a few more occasions. It appears that Hooper is vulnerable in this setting, away from his home. The family decide to take a trip to Leydell Castle. Here, Kingshaw further exploits Hoopers fears as they climb the ancient monument. Hooper falls by accident, and badly injures himself. Even though Kingshaw tried to save him Hooper accuses Kingshaw of pushing him and is believed by the adults. Kingshaw is convinced that he has killed Hooper. As Hooper recovers, it appears that Kingshaw gains independence and meets a local boy by the name of Fielding. Fielding appears confident and well-rounded, and takes Kingshaw to his farm where he witnesses the birth of a calf. This is in stark contrast to Warings, which is full of death morbidity. Glass cabinets filled with moths are used to symbolise the decay of the Hooper dynasty. Fielding offers Kingshaw hope away from the manipulative clutches of Hooper. However, once Hooper returns to health, the normal regime of taunting resumes. Hooper's cruelty climaxes, and Kingshaw is devastated when he discovers that Helena and Joseph have agreed to marry, and that Hooper and Kingshaw will attend school together. The novel ends with Kingshaw committing suicide by drowning himself in the familiar pool in Hang Wood and Mrs. Kingshaw comforting Hooper who is described as feeling a sense of triumph.
Themes
A main theme is power. The whole book revolves around the want and need for power, shown right from the start with Mr Hooper wanting his own father to die so he could have the property. The theme stays constant through the whole book as Edmund Hooper wants power over Kingshaw. However, later on in the book when Kingshaw makes a break for it and Hooper goes and follows Kingshaw who takes control and finally has power over Hooper. Evil is another big theme in this book. You can, again, see this theme the whole way through the book as you follow the torment that Hooper does to Kingshaw and the destruction that Hooper causes, which all causes enjoyment for Hooper. Animals feature throughout Hill's novel, and are often used to symbolise various aspects of the boys' relationship. This also links in with the sense of dynasty in the Hooper household, an upper-class countryside mansion that has fallen into decay. Isolation is another key theme of the novel. The boys lack a healthy relationship with their parents, who are oblivious to their fighting. The entire book seems to question the innocence of childhood, and demonstrate how young children have the capacity to commit truly cruel acts. Nature is another theme in this book. Hill has made quite a few references to the specific flowers and trees in the 'garden' at Warings. The trees include Yew trees which are very dark and dingy and usually appear in a graveyard. Also the mention of Rhodendendrons as well, these flowers are dark and heavy and seem like a burden. Love can be considered another theme, however it's not about how much love the parents have, it's more the lack of love that everyone has. The parents do not know their own children and just seem to dust them under the carpet. They try halfheartedly to get the two boys to get along but they do not know what each boy is capable of and they have no idea what the two boys want.
