The Innocent Mage is the first novel in the Kingmaker, Kingbreaker series by Karen Miller.
Plot introduction
Asher of Restharven wishes to own his own boat so that he may get away from his six brothers and spend time with his father. He goes seeking fortune in Dorana and ends up in service of the young Prince Gar. Unknown to the both of them a secret organization called the Circle is watching Asher for he is the one foretold in the prophecy to save the kingdom.
Plot summary
The Doranen have ruled Lur with magic after fleeing the evil Morg who took over their homeland. For an Olken (Lur's original inhabitants) it is unlawful to use magic. Any Olken who breaks the law will be executed.
Asher has come to Lur‘s capital city to make his fortune. He begins as a worker in the stables of the Royal Palace but is soon made an assistant to the magicless Prince Gar, who is the mediator between the Olken and the Doranen. Soon, he hopes to gain enough money to buy a boat and fish with his father for the rest of his life.
But unrest starts to show among the Olken. It has been prophesied that the Innocent Mage will be born, and the Circle is dedicated to preserving the magic of the Olken until the saviour arrives. The Circle have been watching Asher, and as the city streets are filled with Olken rioters, his life takes a bitter turn.
Characters
Asher-The series protagonist. He is a fisherman's son from an outlying village, destined to be something more.
Dathne-Youngest member of the Circle. She is gifted with visions and seeks the coming of the 'Innocent Mage'
Matt-Asher's best friend and master of the palace stables.
Veira-The unseen leader of The Circle. She guides Dathne and comforts her from the place she stays hidden for protection. She is the only one who knows who all the members of the circle are.
King Borne-King of Lur, The WeatherWorker who controls the Kingdom's weather.
Queen Dana-Queen of Lur, wife of King Borne.
Princess Fane-Second child of the royal family, born to correct the mistake of her older brother's magicless birth. Gifted with incredible power and cursed with a short temper and a rude attitude, she is the WeatherWorker-in-waiting.
Prince Gar-Otherwise known as 'Prince Gar the Magickless', he was born without the ability to perform even the simplest spell. Considered a black mark on his family's name and is very sensitive to the fact that his own race hate him for his lack of magic.
Durm, Master Magician-Best friend of the King and instructor of Princess Fane
Darran-Personal secretary of Prince Gar
Willer-Darran's assistant
Conroyd Jarralt Head of a very important family in Lur. Power hungry, enemy of the King
Barlsman Holze-High Priest of Barl
Matcher-Royal Carriage Driver
