Silent to the Bone (2000) is a novel by E. L. Konigsburg for the middle ages or young adults. It is a companion to The Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place, a fifteen-years prequel published four years later. is his best friend, therapist and detective, young Connor Kane with his adult half-sister "uncovers a complex, multilayered tale of human desires, adolescent confusion, and a touch of menace". Part detective story, some reviews portray it as mystery fiction primarily. It has been recommended for ages 10 to 14.
Summary
Silent to the Bone is a first-person narrative by Connor Kane, a 13-year-old boy. Connor's best friend Branwell Zamborska was struck dumb and taken to the Juvenile Behavioral Center on the day his baby sister Nikki slipped into a coma and was taken to Clarion County Hospital. Nikki suffered a head injury, he dialed 9-1-1 but did not speak, the au pair completed the phone call, and Branwell was blamed for dropping the baby.
Connor knows there is some explanation for Branwell's silence and that Branwell did not intentionally hurt Nikki. He knows that Branwell needs him and visits daily. Because Branwell does not speak, Connor does all the talking and communicates by a kind of sign language , inspired by Jean-Dominique Bauby . "Remember the story of the paralyzed Frenchman who wrote a whole book with the blink of his left eye? I no sooner had the sentence out of mouth than Branwell blinked his eyes twice, very rapidly, and I knew he understood our rules of communication." [6] Initially he elicits clues by presenting keywords on handwritten cards (depicted by the author in the original front cover illustration). Connor recounts his daily visits to his older half-sister Margaret, after her workday, and they solve the case together.
Nikki was hurt by the au pair, Vivian, who neglected her. Vivian smokes which harmed the baby. When Margaret was Connor's age, about fifteen years ago, their father Kane left Margaret's mother for Connor's. Margaret remains chilled by the experience. Connor's parents are not friendly with her, but they welcome her care for Connor after school and sometimes late into the night. "Call your mother and tell her you're having dinner at the Evil Empire," she says to him one evening. [7] Eventually she resorts to Dad's expertise as University Registrar Kane, regarding the Zamborska case; that and some prodding by Connor effect some warming between daughter and father. Then I turned cool.
Characters
Everyone lives around the university campus in Epiphany, Clarion County, New York — a fictional county in Greater New York .
Branwell Zamborska, 13, is the son of Dr. Stefan Zamborska, a genetic biologist at the university, and Linda Branwell, deceased. His Branwell grandparents live in Naples , Florida. Branwell's immediate family now includes step-mother Tina Nguyen and half-sister Nicole or Nikki, a baby. For years after his mother's death, Vivian was his and Nikki's baby-sitter. The Zamborskas live on Tower Hill near the Kanes.
Connor Kane, 13, is the son of Roderick Kane and his second wife. The Kanes live in a suburban housing development on Tower Hill (named for the folk art towers constructed by the Rose brothers at 19 Schuyler Place in Old Town, and moved here nearly fifteen years ago). He and his half-sister Margaret like each other, but Margaret was never his baby-sitter, and they know each other from her semiformal visits. Connor and Branwell have been friends since nursery school and are now eighth grade students at the middle school downtown, where they commute by city bus.
(Margaret is the protagonist of The Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place (2004), a kind of prequel to Silent to the Bone. Her triumph fifteen years ago was bittersweet. When she anticipated sharing it with her parents, she learned that Dad was in love with the new girl. Since then, she has inherited 19 Schuyler Place from her great-uncle Rose and renovated it.)
Themes
From the School Library Journal review, "themes of communication, relationships in blended families, being different, friendship, adolescence, and shame". [8]
From the Amazon.com Review, it shows Konigsburg's "keen understanding of young people"; "darker than some of her others, with a remarkably true glimpse into a young man's inner world". [4]
^ a b c Publishers Weekly. Review quoted by Amazon .
^ The New York Times Book Review . Review of The Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place (2004) quoted in front endpapers of that book, Aladdin Paperbacks edition, first printing, January 2006.
^ First edition, LCC entry : "Companion book to: The outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place and The mysterious edge of the heroic world." Retrieved 2012-05-06.
• Mysterious Edge (2007) is practically unrelated to Silent, although both are set about fifteen years after Outcasts.
^ Hazel Rochman, Booklist. Review quoted by Amazon : "Did the British nanny do it? ...".
^ Silent to the Bone, first edition, p. 34.
^ Silent to the Bone, first edition, p. 79.
^ School Library Journal (2000). Review quoted by Amazon .
Citation – website
