"Decline of the English Murder" is an essay by George Orwell, wherein he analysed the kinds of murders depicted in popular media and why people like to read them. Tribune published it on 15 February 1946, and Secker and Warburg republished it after his death in Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays in 1952. The essay is not essentially about murders, but about British habits; his essays in The Lion and the Unicorn epitomise much of what he felt. Orwell identified several common features among perfect murders: middle class criminals, sex or respectability as motive, mostly poisoning, deaths slow to be seen as due to crime, a dramatic coincidence or unbelievable occurrence, and domestic victims. His essay "Raffles and Miss Blandish" also casts a light on how he thought an English murder was in a different class from any other murder. Orwell excluded Jack the Ripper's murder spree as being "in a class by itself" and considered the cases of Dr. Palmer of Rugeley, Neill Cream, Mrs. Maybrick, Dr. Crippen, Frederick Seddon, Joseph Smith, Armstrong, Bywaters and Thompson, and an unnamed case from 1919, wherein the accused was acquitted. Orwell then contrasted this with the Cleft Chin Murder, a recent murder during World War II, distinguished by its brutality, not emotion nor class. He suggested that people enjoyed the brutality because of the effects of the war, and that it would not be as remembered as the older cases. The essay was later collected in a compilation entitled Decline of the English Murder and Other Essays, published by London's Penguin Group in 1965. The essay's opening sentence pictures a typical working Englishman settling down with the News of the World after his Sunday lunch. The final issue of this newspaper in July 2011 quoted this sentence, claiming that Orwell had well described the sentiments of the nation. However, media pundit Max Atkinson argued that Orwell was in fact satirizing the sensationalist tabloids.
Pages
188 + covers
"Decline of the English Murder" is an essay by George Orwell , wherein he analysed the kinds of murders depicted in popular media and why people like to read them. Tribune published it on 15 February 1946, and Secker and Warburg republished it after his death in Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays in 1952.
Orwell identified several common features which 'have given the greatest amount of pleasure to the British public' during 'our great period in murder, between roughly 1850 and 1925' and may be considered from a News of the World reader's point of view, the "perfect" murder: middle class criminals, sex or respectability as a motif, mostly poisoning, deaths slow to be seen as due to crime, a dramatic coincidence or unbelievable occurrence, the aim of getting hold of a certain known sum of money - usually small, and domestic victims against an essentially domestic background.
Orwell excluded Jack the Ripper 's murder spree as being "in a class by itself" and considered the cases of Dr. Palmer of Rugeley , Neill Cream , Mrs. Maybrick , Dr. Crippen , Frederick Seddon , Joseph Smith , Armstrong , Bywaters and Thompson , and an unnamed case from 1919, wherein the accused was acquitted. [1]
Orwell then contrasted this with the Cleft Chin Murder , a recent murder during World War II , distinguished by its brutal casual-ness, not emotion nor class. He suggested that this story became a distraction amid the doodle-bugs and created excitement because the man was sentenced to death and the girl to imprisonment - a call for the girl also to be hanged Orwell suggests flows from the brutalizing effects of the war, and that the story would not be as remembered as the older cases.
The essay was later collected in a compilation entitled Decline of the English Murder and Other Essays, published by London's Penguin Group in 1965.
The essay's opening sentence pictures a typical working Englishman settling down with the News of the World after his Sunday lunch. The final issue of this newspaper in July 2011 quoted this sentence, claiming that Orwell had well described the sentiments of the nation. However, media pundit Max Atkinson argued that Orwell was in fact satirizing the sensationalist tabloids. [2]
His essay " Raffles and Miss Blandish " also casts a light on how he thought an English murder was in a different class from any other murder and compares a 'partly Americanised' sensibility to former times.
