On Beyond Zebra! is an illustrated children's book by Theodor Geisel, better known as Dr. Seuss. This book fits into the genre of literary nonsense. The young narrator, not content with the confines of the ordinary alphabet, invents additional letters beyond Z, with a fantastic creature corresponding to each new letter. The creatures include favorites such as the Floob-Boober-Bab-Boober-Bubs, large buoyant heads which float serenely in the water. These naturally serve as the example for the letter "FLOOB". Most of his letters look like monograms of their names. In order, these are named YUZZ (Yuzz-a-ma-Tuzz), WUM (Wumbus), UM (Umbus), HUMPF (Humpf-Humpf-a-Dumpfer), FUDDLE (Miss Fuddle-dee-Duddle), GLIKK (Glikker), NUH (Nutches), SNEE (Sneedle), QUAN (Quandary), THNAD (Thnadners), SPAZZ (Spazzim), FLOOB (Floob-Boober-Bab-Boober-Bubs), ZATZ (Zatz-it), JOGG (Jogg-oons), FLUNN (Flunnel), ITCH (Itch-a-pods), YEKK (Yekko), VROO (Vrooms), and HI! (High Gargel-orum). The book ends with an unnamed letter that apparently is a monogram of all 26 letters in the existing Latin alphabet. It is left as an exercise in naming for the reader. Some of the animals from On Beyond Zebra appear in the 1975 CBS TV Special, The Hoober-Bloob Highway such as a Jogg-oon, a Sneedle, a Zatz-it, and a Wumbus. These letters are not officially encoded in Unicode, but the independent ConScript Unicode Registry provides an unofficial assignment of code points in the Unicode Private Use Area for them.
Plot
The young narrator, not content with the confines of the ordinary alphabet , invents additional letters beyond Z , with a fantastic creature corresponding to each new letter. For example, the letter "FLOOB" corresponds to the Floob-Boober-Bab-Boober-Bubs, which have large buoyant heads and float serenely in the water. In order, the letters, followed by the animals that correspond to them, are: YUZZ (Yuzz-a-ma-Tuzz), WUM (Wumbus), UM (Umbus), HUMPF (Humpf-Humpf-a-Dumpfer), FUDDLE (Miss Fuddle-dee-Duddle), GLIKK (Glikker), NUH (Nutches), SNEE (Sneedle), QUAN (Quandary), THNAD (Thnadners), SPAZZ (Spazzim), FLOOB (Floob-Boober-Bab-Boober-Bubs), ZATZ (Zatz-it), JOGG (Jogg-oons), FLUNN (Flunnel), ITCH (Itch-a-pods), YEKK (Yekko), VROO (Vrooms), and HI! (High Gargel-orum). The book ends with an unnamed letter that apparently is a monogram of all 26 letters in the existing Latin alphabet from A to Z. A list of all the additional letters is shown at the end.
Analysis
Judith and Neil Morgan, Geisel's biographers, note that most of the letters resemble elaborate monograms , "perhaps in Old Persian". [2] These letters are not officially encoded in Unicode , but the independent ConScript Unicode Registry provides an unofficial assignment of code points in the Unicode Private Use Area for them. [3]
The imaginary letters that appear in On Beyond Zebra, rendered in Constructium font
Legacy
Some of the animals from On Beyond Zebra appear in the 1975 CBS TV Special, The Hoober-Bloob Highway such as a Jogg-oon, a Sneedle, a Zatz-it, and a Wumbus.
^ On Beyond Zebra!. New York: Random House. 1990. ISBN   0-394-80084-2 . 
^ Morgan & Morgan, p. 152
