Nightwings is a science fiction novella by Robert Silverberg. It won the Hugo Award for Best Novella in 1969 and was also nominated for the Nebula Award in 1968. Nightwings is the first in a trilogy of novellas, the next two being Perris Way (1968) and To Jorslem (1969). These three works were later collected into a single novel in three sections, also titled Nightwings. According to Silverberg's introductions, the changes required to turn the three shorter works into a novel were relatively minor.
Publication date
1968
Nightwings is a science fiction novella by Robert Silverberg . It won the Hugo Award for Best Novella in 1969 and was also nominated for the Nebula Award in 1968. Nightwings is the first in a trilogy of novellas, the next two being Perris Way (1968) and To Jorslem (1969). These three works were later collected into a single novel in three sections, also titled Nightwings. According to Silverberg's introductions, the changes required to turn the three shorter works into a novel were relatively minor.
Plot summary
In a decadent and caste-based future humanity is divided into guilds, each having a specific job to do. The members of some guilds appear to have undergone genetic engineering; for instance, the Fliers' ability to fly and the Watchers' ability to use their mental capabilities to watch distant stars.
The main character in the novella is a Watcher, whose mission is to watch the skies with some sophisticated equipment and to inform the Defenders in the event of an alien invasion. Along with a young Flier girl and a Changeling (who belongs to no guild), he visits the old city of Roum (suspected previously to be called Rome), and becomes entangled in events including the possibility of invasion.
Apart from Roum, only two other great cities are mentioned, Jorslem ( Jerusalem ) and Perris ( Paris ), but their greatness is relative, as they only have a few thousand inhabitants.
In 1985 Nightwings was adapted as a graphic novel , the second in the DC Science Fiction Graphic Novel line, by Cary Bates and Gene Colan .
An abridged audiobook edition of Nightwings was released on compact cassette by Durkin Hayes Audio in 1987, ISBN 0886462134 , ISBN 9780886462130 .
The LucasArts computer adventure game Loom (1990) may have had inspiration from Nightwings.
