The Foot Book: Dr. Seuss's Wacky Book of Opposites is a children's book written by Dr. Seuss and first published in 1968. The Foot Book is intended for young children, and it seeks to convey the concept of opposites through depictions of different kinds of feet. The text of The Foot Book is highly stylized, containing the rhymes, repetitions, and cadences typical of Dr. Seuss's work. Reading this book will teach the reader that you should not judge any one because of what they look like or in this case their feet. The Foot Book is Seuss's first in the Bright and Early Books series, intended for children too young for books in the Beginner Books series. It was also his first book after the death of his wife Helen Palmer Geisel, and Seuss put in eight-hour days working on it as a way of coping with his loss. The Foot Book was extremely successful, and as of 1997, it was in its 52nd reprinting.
The Cat in the Hat Song Book
Followed by
I Can Lick 30 Tigers Today! and Other Stories
The Foot Book: Dr. Seuss's Wacky Book of Opposites ( ISBN 0-394-80937-8 ) is a children's book written by Dr. Seuss and first published in 1968. [1]
The Foot Book is intended for young children, and it seeks to convey the concept of opposites through depictions of different kinds of feet. The text of The Foot Book is highly stylized, containing the rhymes, repetitions, and cadences typical of Dr. Seuss's work. Reading this book will teach the reader that you should not judge any one because of what they look like or in this case their feet.
The Foot Book is Seuss's first in the Bright and Early Books series, intended for children too young for books in the Beginner Books series. [1] It was also his first book after the death of his wife Helen Palmer Geisel , and Seuss put in eight-hour days working on it as a way of coping with his loss. [1] The Foot Book was extremely successful, and as of 1997, it was in its 52nd reprinting. [2]
Inspiration for others
Like many Dr. Seuss books, The Foot Book has inspired others. Big Brother Mouse , a publishing project in Laos, drew on The Foot Book to develop Baby Frog, Baby Monkey, a book for very young readers that uses rhymes, repetition, and the pairing of opposite words.
References
^ a b c Fensch, Thomas. "The Man Who Was Dr. Seuss: The Life and Work of Theodor Geisel", New Century Books, 2001, p. 156. ISBN 0-930751-11-6
^ Fensch, pp. 156-157.
