The Headless Cupid is a children's novel by Zilpha Keatley Snyder. First published in 1971, the book was a Newbery Honor book for 1972. When the Stanley family moves to a large old country house, plenty of problems arise for eleven-year-old David, including adjusting to his new step-mother, taking care of his three younger siblings, and trying not to make trouble for his university-professor father. But it is his new step-sister, Amanda, with her pet crow, dark clothes, and mysterious knowledge of the occult, who poses the greatest threat to peace and tranquility in the Stanley household. That is, until the poltergeist. As the unexplained accidents mount in frequency and intensity, and the troubled history of the old house comes to light, David must solve the mystery of the headless cupid before it destroys his new family.
12873557
The Headless Cupid is a children's novel by Zilpha Keatley Snyder . First published in 1971, the book was a Newbery Honor book for 1972.
After his university-professor father remarries, eleven-year-old David Stanley must make a series of new adjustments: first to his new stepmother, then to the strange old house to which the family relocates, and finally to his new stepsister Amanda. Amanda, however, doesn't plan to make adjustment easy for anyone. She arrives wearing a ceremonial costume, with a pile of books on the supernatural and a caged crow in tow. Claiming to be a practicing witch , Amanda offers to share her occult knowledge with four Stanley children. David, while skeptical, follows Amanda's lead until a series of poltergeist activities, all centering around the strange headless wooden cupid carved in the front stair, infest the Stanley home. David suspects Amanda is responsible for the chaos, but, as the unexplained incidents mount in frequency and intensity, the troubled history of the old house comes to light. David must solve the mystery of the headless cupid before it destroys his new family.
Literary significance & criticism
This book has made the American Library Association 's list of the one hundred most frequently challenged books for 1990-2000, due to the use of witchcraft by the children.
Awards
