The Citadel of Chaos is a single-player adventure gamebook written by Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone, and illustrated by Russ Nicholson. Originally published by Puffin Books in 1983, the title is the second gamebook in the Fighting Fantasy series. It was later republished by Wizard Books in 2002. The gamebook was also adapted a video game.
Main article: Fighting Fantasy
This adventure was the first Fighting Fantasy title to allow the player to use magic, with it being possible to finish the adventure without having engaged in combat at all[ citation needed ].
Plot
Deep inside the Citadel of Chaos, the dread sorcerer Balthus Dire is plotting the downfall of the goodfolk of the Vale of Willow. His battle plans are laid, his awesome army equipped, and attack is surely imminent. Summoned by a desperate plea for help, YOU are the Vale of Willow’s only hope. As star pupil of the Grand Wizard of Yore and a master sorcerer yourself, you must strike at the very heart of Balthus Dire’s nightmare world. Though you command many powerful spells, the quest may be deadly, for who knows what creatures lie in wait in the Citadel of Chaos?
The player takes the role of an adventurer on a quest to find and stop the powerful magician Balthus Dire. In order to be able to confront Dire, the player must navigate the Citadel, avoiding monsters while also collecting several artifacts that will allow passage past guardians to the villain's inner sanctum.
Reception
Marcus L. Rowland reviewed The Citadel of Chaos for the June 1983 issue of White Dwarf , rating the title a 9 out of a possible 10. Rowland called The Citadel of Chaos "an exciting adventure", and noted that the book's introduction of magic as an extra characteristic "adds a new range of decisions to encounters". [1]
Karen L. Miller, staff writer at Reading Eagle , stated that the title featured "an elaborate combat system with adventure score sheets. This way you read and at the same time...conquer the dreaded sorcerer at the heart of The Citadel of Chaos". [2]
In other media
A video game based on the book was released by Puffin Books for the ZX Spectrum [3] and Commodore 64 [4] in 1984.
In 2010, an electronic version of the title was released for the iPhone and iPad by Big Blue Bubble . [5]
