Agent to the Stars is a novel by John Scalzi. It tells the story of Tom Stein, a young Hollywood agent who is hired by an alien race to handle the revelation of their presence to humanity. Scalzi started Agent to the Stars in 1997 as his "practice" novel, to see if he could write a novel. He published it as a shareware novel on his web site in 1999, requesting that readers send him $1 if they liked the story. After five years, during which he reports he made about $4,000, he stopped asking for further donations. After the publication of Scalzi's second book, Old Man's War, by Tor Books, a limited edition of Agent to the Stars was published in 2005 by Subterranean Press, with a cover by Mike Krahulik of Penny Arcade fame. Tor later released a trade paperback edition in November, 2008, and a mass market edition in December, 2010. An audiobook version narrated by Wil Wheaton was released on December 7, 2010.
Pages
286
Agent to the Stars is a novel by John Scalzi . It tells the story of Tom Stein, a young Hollywood agent who is hired by an alien race to handle the revelation of their presence to humanity.
Scalzi started Agent to the Stars in 1997 as his "practice" novel, to see if he could write a novel. He published it as a shareware novel on his web site in 1999, requesting that readers send him $1 if they liked the story. [1] After five years, during which he reports he made about $4,000, he stopped asking for further donations.
After the publication of Scalzi's second book, Old Man's War , by Tor Books , a limited edition of Agent to the Stars was published in 2005 by Subterranean Press , with a cover by Mike Krahulik of Penny Arcade fame. Tor later released a trade paperback edition in November, 2008, and a mass market edition in December, 2010. [2] An audiobook version narrated by Wil Wheaton was released on December 7, 2010.
Plot
Tom Stein is a celebrity agent, representing a handful of Hollywood actors, the most famous of which is Michelle Beck, an earnest but brainless blonde who wants to break into serious acting despite having very limited talent. Carl Lupo, Toms boss, tells him to drop all his clients in order to take on Joshua. Joshua, as it turns out, is a Yherjak, an amorphous ameboid species that communicate through olfactory transmission, and smell horrifically awful, that have traveled to Earth in an asteroid to make first contact. Realizing they fit the Hollywood movie description of an alien monster, the aliens contacted Carl surreptitously and created Joshua through an amalgam of Joshua and Carl's thoughts.
Joshua hides at Toms house, and fuses with Ralph, an elderly dog that Tom had been caring for, after Ralph suffered a heart attack. In order to give Joshua something to do, he begins hiring Joshua the dog out for roles, and he instantly becomes the most wanted canine actor in Hollywood, given his apparent abilities.
Later, after a disastrous reading for a part in a Holocaust drama movie, Michelle is accidentally smothered while making a special effect mask for a sci-fi movie. Realizing that the Yherjak could heal her by bonding, similar to how Joshua bonded with Ralph the dog, he conspires to take her to the ship. This causes an uproar, as bonding with a sentient member of a species is the most atrocious act among the Yherjak. After learning that Michelle suffocated by accident, the Yherjak agree and Michelle reemerges, now a mental simulacrum of Michelle, Joshua, Carl, and Ralph the dog.
Tom stumbles on the idea of casting Michelle in the Holocaust film Hard Memories. After meeting Tom's grandmother Sarah Rosenthal, a Holocaust survivor, Michelle absorbs her memories and delivers a blistering audition. The movie is an unparalleled success, and Michelle wins a Golden Globe for Best Actress. During her acceptance speech, she gradually asserts her normal, clear gelatinous shape, while making a call for acceptance regardless of appearance or form. The Yherjak, revealed at last, are widely accepted.
