So B. It is a children's novel by Sarah Weeks. In 2007 it won book awards in Illinois and Kansas.
Plot summary
Twelve-year-old Heidi It lives in the town of Reno, Nevada with her mentally-disabled mother and their neighbor, Bernadette. Her mother only knows twenty-three words, including one mysterious one, "soof," that no one can define. Meanwhile, Bernadette has a serious condition called agoraphobia , which causes her to be too afraid to go outside her house. Heidi must take on responsibilities beyond her years to provide for their households.
Heidi finally discovers a key to her past in a desk drawer. It was a camera. The developed photos reveal her mother "So B. It" at a Christmas party in New York many years before. Heidi decides to go to Liberty,New York, anxious to uncover more about her family history and to seek what the word "soof" means. Although Bernadette is anxious about Heidi leaving, she reluctantly allows her to go as long as she calls at every rest stop. During her road trip to Liberty, New York, Heidi meets several characters, including Alice Willinsky and Georgia Sweet, a kind and curious 18-year old on the bus. When she arrived at Hilltop Home, where her mother apparently lived before Heidi was born, the director, Thurman Hill, does not welcome her. He also will not admit that Heidi's mother ever lived there. Feeling sorrowful, Ruby, who also works at Hilltop Home, takes Heidi into her own home, and she and her husband, Roy, investigate.
With their help, Heidi discovers that Thurman Hill, is her grandfather, Elliot, a mentally disabled man who lives there, is her father, and that her grandmother, who died years before, was named Diane. She finally finds out what her mother's word, soof, meant, which was her nickname for her name Sophia Demuth and her word for love.
In the end Mama dies,but everyone has their happy ending.Ruby has a baby girl,Thurman Hill gets to meet Heidi, and Heidi gets to go home with Bernie.Heidi goes to school where everyone knows her as Heidi Demuth, not the little girl with the last name "It".
Characters in this story
Heidi DeMuth: The main character in the story. She is kind, courageous, very lucky and determined.
Mama (Sophia Lynne DeMuth, a.k.a. Soof a.k.a. So B. It): Heidi's mentally disabled mother. She is kind, even though she has a very limited vocabulary and little ability to learn. She dies in her sleep while Heidi is away.
Bernadette (Bernie): Heidi's neighbor who is like her mother/guardian. She has agoraphobia .
Elliot: Heidi's father and Sophia's best friend. He is also mentally disabled. Also names Sophia "soof"
Thurman Hill: Heidi's grandfather. He works at Hilltop Home, a place for the mentally disabled where Heidi's mother lived for a year.
Zander: Heidi's overweight best friend who lives in her apartment building and gives her Devil Dogs (product of Drake's ) and other junk food.
Roy Franklin: A man who helps Heidi with her quest. His wife is Ruby Franklin (see below). His occupation is a sheriff.
Ruby Franklin: A woman who helps Heidi with her quest and takes care of her for part of her journey. Her husband is Roy Franklin (see above). She works at Hilltop Home.
Diane DeMuth: Heidi's grandmother. She unfortunately dies before Heidi gets to meet her in a bus accident.
Georgia: An 18-year old bound for college who joins Heidi for part of her bus trip. Unlike Alice Wilinsky, the first woman Heidi meets along the way, Georgia asks instead of telling, and Heidi finds herself sharing her story in detail and without embellishment.
Alice Wilinskys: The first person Heidi meets on her way to Liberty. Heidi tell her that Shirley temple taught her grandmother how to bake, Heidi actually lied to her.
Mama's words
Soof: A mysterious word that Mama and Elliot use to call Mama because Elliot can't pronounce her name (Sophia). It is also Mama's word for love.
So Be It: How Mama pronounces her own name.
Dette: Mama's word for Bernadette.
'Back Soon:Not how it sounds.
Heidi: The story's main character.
Tea: Tea, which Mama makes for Heidi or Bernadette.
Done: Once Mama is finished with a task ( example: opening cans), Used by Mama when she gets frustrated
Complete list of Mama's words
Heidi
