An Artist of the Floating World (1986) is a novel by British-Japanese author Kazuo Ishiguro. It is set in post-World War II Japan and is narrated by Masuji Ono, an aging painter, who looks back on his life and how he has lived it. He notices how his once great reputation has faltered since the war and how attitudes towards him and his paintings have changed. The chief conflict deals with Ono's need to accept responsibility for his past actions. The novel attempts to ask and answer the question: what is man's role in a rapidly changing environment?
Narrative structure
In the buildup to World War II, Ono, a promising artist, broke away from the teaching of his master, whose artistic aim is to reach an aesthetic ideal, and became involved in far-right politics, making propagandistic art. As a member of the Cultural Committee of the Interior Department and official adviser to the Committee of Unpatriotic Activities, Ono became a police informer, taking an active part in an ideological witch hunt. After the 1945 defeat and the collapse of jingoistic early twentieth-century Japan, Ono became a discredited figure, one of the "traitors" who "led the country astray", though the victims of state repression, including people Ono himself had denounced, are reinstated and allowed to lead a normal life. Over the course of the first three sections, spanning October 1948 – November 1949, Ono seems to show a growing acknowledgement of his past "errors", although this acknowledgement is never explicitly stated. However, in the short fourth and last section (June 1950), Ono appears to have returned to his earlier inability to change his viewpoint.
The book is written in the first person and hinges on the exclusive use of a single, unreliable narrative voice, expressing a viewpoint which the reader identifies as limited and fallible, without any other voice or point of view acting as a test. Ono often makes it clear that he is not sure of the accuracy of his narrative, but this may either make the reader cautious or, on the contrary, suggest that Ono is very honest and, therefore, trustworthy.
The self-image Ono expresses in his narrative is vastly different from the image of him the reader builds from reading the same narrative. Ono often quotes others as expressing admiration and indebtedness to him. Ono's narrative is characterised by denial, so that his interests and his hierarchy of values are at odds with the reader's. The reader, therefore, finds what they are interested in is not in the focus of Ono's narrative but at its fringes, presented in an oblique rather than frontal way. For example, Ono's descriptions of his pictures focus on pictorial technique, mentioning the subjects as if they were unimportant, although they reveal the propagandistic nature of his work. It is not necessarily clear if this focus on style rather than substance should be ascribed to Ono as narrator (showing his retrospective, unconscious embarrassment) or if it was already present in him at the time he was making the pictures (showing that totalitarianism exploits people's "ability" to restrain their consciousness to limited aspects of their actions). Similarly, when Ono narrates an episode when he was confronted with the results of his activity as a police informer, it is debatable whether his attempt to mitigate the police's brutality is a retrospective fabrication devised to avoid his responsibility, or whether he did disapprove of the treatment of the person he had denounced, dissociating himself from his actions and refusing to recognise this treatment as a direct and foreseeable consequence of his own action.
Themes
Among the themes explored in this novel are arranged marriage, the changing roles of women, and the declining status of "elders" in Japanese society since 1945. The novel is narrated by a man who, besides being an artist, is also a father, a grandfather, and a widower. It tells, with a strong voice, much about the "pleasure" era of Japanese society, elaborating on the life of a successful and devoted young artist in a decadent era. We learn how attitudes to Japanese art and society became less tolerant of such extravagance, and what it was like to live with the guilt of such pleasure. The pace is slow and luscious, reflecting the central theme.
