The Sea of Trolls is a fantasy novel for children, written by Nancy Farmer and published by Atheneum in 2004. It inaugurated the so-called Sea of Trolls series, which Farmer continued in 2007 and 2009.
Plot summary
The Sea of Trolls is set in A.D. 793 in Anglo-Saxon England , Scandinavia , and the mythical realm of Jotunheim .
Jack the main character of the book is being trained by a famous skald (bard) named Dragon Tongue. His training had not been completed when he was captured by Viking raiders along with his younger sister Lucy (ages 11 and 5 at the beginning of the book). The pair are to be sold as slaves as soon as they reach land. On board the Viking ship Jack meets, and ultimately, befriends Thorgil, a young would-be beserker, and Olaf, the leader of the raiders along with Boldheart the crow. The Northmen intend to sell Jack and Lucy at the slave market to " Picts ", but the two thralls are spared because Lucy is adorable and Jack is a bard. Olaf decides to keep Jack as his personal skald (Viking term for bard) and Thorgil decides to give Lucy as a present to King Ivar the Boneless and his half-troll wife, Queen Frith.
When they arrive at the court nothing goes as planned. Jack is sentenced to menial labor and made to clean the barn. There Jack encounters the deadly troll-pig, Golden Bristles, who is to be sacrificed to the goddess, Freya, by being placed in a wooden cart and left to sink in a bog. After singing Olaf One-Brow's praise-song for the Northman's homecoming, Jack inadvertently makes Queen Frith lose her hair. Queen Frith threatens to sacrifice Lucy (instead of the troll-pig) to the goddess Freya, because Jack set Golden Bristles free. However, Frith allows Jack a chance to save Lucy and their freedom if he can make her hair grow back, which is much more difficult than she makes it sound. Jack goes with Olaf and Thorgil to Jotunheim, land of the Trolls, to seek the mythic Mimir's Well, a well with magical water (song mead) which gives the drinker knowledge, at the roots of the world tree Yggdrasil . Olaf One-Brow is killed by a "trollbear," a gigantic bear native to Jotunheim. Jack and Thorgil are captured by a dragon, but Bold Heart the crow tricks the dragon and enables Jack and Thorgil to escape. Thorgil slays the baby male dragon but gets some blood on her tongue, allowing her to speak with birds. On the way Jack also visits the queen of the Jotuns ( Trolls ), as he needs her consent to continue seeking Mimir's Well. He finds the tree Yggdrasil and Mimir's Well. Both he and Thorgil drink from the well, and Jack saves some for Rune, a skald (bard) who teaches Jack poetry. With the knowledge Jack gains from drinking from Mimir's Well, he returns to the land of Northman to restore Frith's hair.
Upon return, Jack and company are summoned to the court. Jack explains to Queen Frith that she needs to cut off 1/3 of the hair from her troll cats but no more to restore her hair. She doesn't listen and cuts all of the cats' hair off. As a result, Frith's hair grows everywhere not just back on her head. She runs off crazed.
Later Olaf's oldest son commands the ship and takes Jack and Lucy back to their village. Upon return, Jack finds his mother and learns that Dragon Tongue, his mentor, has been a crazed person ever since Jack and Lucy had been captured by the Northmen. He goes to see Dragon Tongue with Bold Heart and Dragon Tongue's heart stops beating. Jack gives Dragon Tongue the remaining water from Mimir's Well and he comes back to life. Dragon Tongue tells him that he had become a crow during the voyage.
On this quest Jack and Thorgil encounter many dangers and learn to make sacrifices for the sake of others.
