The Devil and Miss Prym (Portuguese: O Demônio e a srta Prym) is a novel by the Brazilian novelist Paulo Coelho.
Plot summary
For almost fifteen years, old Berta had spent everyday sitting outside, watching over the little village Viscos , talking with her deceased husband. She is waiting for the devil to come, as her husband predicted. One day a stranger appears with the intention of staying one week in the village.
In the woods he buries 11 bars of gold. On the way back he meets Chantal Prym, a young and beautiful barmaid, who is bored of the idyllic scenery and slow pace of life. Regularly she seduces tourists in the hope that one of them will prove to be her escape route. The stranger shows her the buried treasure and promises that it will belong to the villagers if they agree to kill someone.
There is a ferocious battle within the young woman; a battle between her angel and her devil. She sees in the gold the ticket to finally escape. Still, something holds her back.
After some days, she decides to tell what the stranger has proposed, trusting that they will refuse. The people's reaction, however, plants the seed of doubt inside of Chantal. Now she fears for her own life. As an act of desperation, she plans to abandon Viscos with one of the stranger's bars. Destiny sends a rogue wolf, which threatens Chantal's life. The stranger arrives, and both escape.
Meanwhile the villagers assemble to choose their victim. The scapegoat they choose is Berta, since she is already old and serves no purpose in the village. Before the villagers shoot a sedated Berta, Chantal convinces them that under no circumstances murder is justified; our conduct is a matter of control and choice.
The stranger
A man persecuted by the ghosts of his painful past comes to Viscos desperately searching for answers. Once he had been a good man when at a whim of destiny his life was torn apart. His family had been kidnapped by a group of terrorists who threatened to kill them unless he agreed to hand over a huge amount of weapons. He however made the mistake to call in the police and thus sacrificing what he held near and dear. The loss of his family held a pain seemingly unbearable and at the moment in which the aching was the strongest he became accompanied by the devil. He desires closure by discovering the motives for the terrorists to kill his family, and finding if humanity is truly good or evil.
Old Berta
The widow passed her days with watching the village and the nature surrounding it. Often enough she had a little chat with her already deceased husband. She had the ability to see ghosts, the peoples' emotions, devils, and angels as well, which was the reason for the villagers calling her a witch. Berta can also read signs of nature so she took the hint when there was a storm approaching the moment the stranger arrived in the village.
The inhabitants of Viscos decided her to die as a sacrifice for the welfare of the village and agreed to pay her back with building a fountain. Even when she didn't have to die she got her fountain.
Major themes
The plot deals with choices in everyday life, which is a battle between good and evil by itself. Finally, our choices make the difference; but we have to take responsibility for our actions.
Fear
