The Edge of the Cloud is a historical novel written for children or young adults by K. M. Peyton and published in 1969. It was the second book in Peyton's original Flambards trilogy, comprising three books published by Oxford with illustrations by Victor Ambrus (1967 to 1969), a series the author extended more than a decade later. Set in England prior to the First World War, it continues the romance of Christina Parsons and Will Russell. The title alludes to Will's participation in early aviation. Peyton won the annual Carnegie Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book by a British subject. She also won the 1970 Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, selected by a panel of British children's writers, a once-in-a-lifetime award that ordinarily recognises one fiction book published during the preceding calendar year. Exceptionally the 1970 award recognised the series completed in 1969. World Publishing Company of New York issued the first U.S. edition in 1969, retaining the Ambrus illustrations. The trilogy was adapted as a 13-part television series in 1979, Flambards starring Christine McKenna as Christina Parsons. Peyton then continued and partly reversed the story.
Flambards in Summer
The Edge of the Cloud is a historical novel written for children or young adults by K. M. Peyton and published in 1969 . It was the second book in Peyton's original Flambards trilogy, comprising three books published by Oxford with illustrations by Victor Ambrus (1967 to 1969), a series the author extended more than a decade later. Set in England prior to the First World War , it continues the romance of Christina Parsons and Will Russell. The title alludes to Will's participation in early aviation .
Peyton won the annual Carnegie Medal from the Library Association , recognising the year's best children's book by a British subject . [3] She also won the 1970 Guardian Children's Fiction Prize , selected by a panel of British children's writers, a once-in-a-lifetime award that ordinarily recognises one fiction book published during the preceding calendar year. [4] Exceptionally the 1970 award recognised the series completed in 1969. [5]
World Publishing Company of New York issued the first U.S. edition in 1969, retaining the Ambrus illustrations. [2]
The trilogy was adapted as a 13-part television series in 1979, Flambards starring Christine McKenna as Christina Parsons. Peyton then continued and partly reversed the story.
Contents
