Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets is a 1991 book written by Baltimore Sun reporter David Simon describing a year spent with detectives from the Baltimore Police Department Homicide Unit. The book received the 1992 Edgar Award in the Best Fact Crime category. The book was subsequently fictionalized as the NBC television drama Homicide: Life on the Street (1993–99), on which Simon served as a writer and producer. Many of the key detectives and incidents portrayed in the book provided inspiration for the first two seasons of the show, with other elements surfacing in later seasons as well. It later also provided inspiration for the HBO television series The Wire.
Detective Sergeant Jay Landsman - Squad Supervisor
Detective Tom Pellegrini
Detective Oscar "Rick" Requer "The Bunk"
Detective Gary Dunnigan
Detective Richard Fahlteich
Detective Fred Ceruti
Fahlteich and Ceruti both transferred out of the unit during the year; they were replaced by Detectives Vernon Holley and Chris Graul.
The Wire
Several of the detectives described in the book served as the basis for characters on the Baltimore-based HBO drama The Wire . Jay Landsman spawned a character of the same name, and the real-life Landsman portrayed a character named Dennis Mello . Rick "The Bunk" Requer was the basis for Detective Bunk Moreland in the series and in episode four of season five Roscoe Orman played a veteran named Oscar "Rick" Requer . Gary D'Addario appears as a Prosecuting Attorney Gary DiPasquale on the show who assists Detective Moreland with various grand jury summonses.
Roger Nolan,Terry McLarney and Donald Worden are briefly mentioned as officers in the department on various episodes and Worden makes a cameo appearance as himself in the fifth season. A 1970s contract killer named Dennis Wise is also briefly mentioned and Dennis "Cutty" Wise is a major character in the series. Another name that was used for a character was Roger Twigg, a police reporter who, in the book, is characterized as a major pain in the backside of law enforcement- when the Monroe Street investigation yielded a potential civilian lead, Twigg published an article calling the civilian a potential suspect, which was technically true but police believed he was probably just a witness. Nevertheless it closed down that avenue because it caused the man to invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to testify.
Additionally, several traits of various officers can be viewed amongst the characters on the show. A lot of similar slang is also used on the show such as the words "Dunker", "Redball", and "Stone Whodunit" to describe the various cases. The police department as shown on the show also has the same red/black case clearance and marking criteria.
Finally, a number of small anecdotes that were used in Homicide: Life on the Street worked their way into The Wire, most notably the tale of "Snot Boogie", a small-time thief who was shot down after a craps game, which was used in the cold open of the series' first episode, providing the "This America, man" quote. When listing the detectives who he sees himself and the rest of the VCU as being on a par with, McNulty mentions Worden, Ed Burns (who was a homicide detective but was detailed with the FBI for the year) and Gary Childs, a detective on the other shift in the book.
Where are they now?
Gary D'Addario
Lieutenant Gary D'Addario rose to the rank of Major commanding the Northeastern District of the Baltimore Police Department. The 37-year veteran of the department was forced to retire by new Commissioner Kevin Clark in 2004 as part of Clark's unpopular turnover of veteran command staff. [3] D'Addario had guest appearances as QRT Lieutenant Jasper in Homicide: Life on the Street, as a Desk Sergeant in HBO mini-series The Corner, and as a Grand Jury States Attorney on the HBO drama The Wire. [4]
Jay Landsman
Sergeant Jay Landsman retired from the Baltimore Police Department and joined the Baltimore County Police Department . Landsman worked as an actor playing Lieutenant Dennis Mello in HBO's The Wire . [5] The actor Delaney Williams plays a character called Sergeant Jay Landsman in the same show. [6] Landsman's son Jay Jr. also works as a county homicide detective working out of precinct 4 in Pikesville, Maryland .
Donald Waltemeyer
Detective Donald Waltemeyer retired from the Baltimore Police Department and joined the Aberdeen Police Department. He died of cancer in 2005 and was posthumously promoted to Detective Sergeant.
Roger Nolan and Donald Worden
Detective Sergeant Roger Nolan became the founder and longtime supervisor of the department's Cold Case Squad, and retired a day before his 70th birthday in 2009. Detective Donald Worden retired from police work in 1995 but was subsequently re-hired as a civilian contractor to work with the squad.
Tom Pellegrini
Detective Tom Pellegrini joined the UNMIK police in Kosovo in 2000. Pellegrini is currently a private investigator with Sherwood Investigators based in Severn, Maryland .
Richard Fahlteich
Detective Richard Fahlteich rose to the rank of Major and was named commander of the Baltimore Police Department Homicide Unit. He retired in 2006.
Terry McLarney
Detective Sergeant Terry McLarney is still in the Baltimore Police Department, now holding the rank of Major in the Homicide Section. He spent years of exile in the Western "where he was banished after his shift commander [not D'Addario, whom he considered a friend] politely declined an invitation to fisticuffs." McLarney began to serve as acting commander of the Homicide Section in May 2008 and was officially named to the post in July. [7] In June 2011, McLarney was replaced as commander. [8]
The book details a number of slang terms used by the city's homicide detectives.
Billyland - area of South Baltimore inhabited by "billies" (hillbillies), the city's " white trash redneck" population.
Billygoat- derogatory term for whites, specifically those with roots in Appalachia , and their descendants. As with blacks, "billies" do not include those with decent jobs, such as Worden or Kincaid, and Simon suggests that the two discriminations are more class-based. One typical description is that "Billies do not reside in Baltimore, they live in Bawlmer."
Board, The - A dry erase board kept in the squad room. Every squad sergeant's name is listed in columns on the top. Below their names are the names of the cases which their detectives are investigating, and a letter indicating which detective is the "primary" on the case. Open cases are listed in red. Closed cases are listed in black. This allowed supervisors to get a quick assessment of how productive each detective/squad was and acted as motivation for detectives. Use of "The Board" was discontinued in 1998 due to public relations and morale concerns, but was restored in 2000 at the request of the detectives. Closed cases from previous years are written in blue ink, as noted briefly in the afterword regarding Worden's current work on cold cases, "putting blue names on the Board." The show followed this convention as well, though the layout of "the Board" was different: each shift used one full side, with a separate column for every detective on the shift in alphabetical order.
Bunk/Bunky- A term of affection (short for "bunkmate") typically applied to friends and co-workers. McLarney regards McAllister as "my bunky," while Requer is known as "the Bunk." The veteran cops in the Southern District think of Waltemeyer in this way and readily help him find a car used by a murder suspect. Also used sarcastically towards suspects.
Citizen or Taxpayer - A 'real' murder victim, as opposed to a drug dealer or gang member murdered in the course of criminal activity.
Dunker - An easily cleared case (from the basketball term slam dunk ). An example from the book: a husband who is arrested while standing over his wife's dead body, covered in her blood, telling cops he killed her and would do so again if he got the chance.
Dying declaration - A dying person is able to speak and identify their attacker and definitely knows they are dying. However, useful declarations are rare and instead they tend to become the stuff of homicide legend. For example, one man, dying from a gunshot, "assured detectives that he would take care of the matter himself." Garvey solves a case using a dying declaration during the book.
Eyefuck - To look at someone disrespectfully or in anger. A ceremonial eyefuck takes place in the book when an unrepentant criminal is convicted. Garvey is disappointed when one criminal, convicted for two brutal murders, does not follow this tradition, describing him as "no fun at all".
Jake - A semi-derogatory term for a Jamaican-American
Number One Male - Police Radio Description for an African American (Number One) Male Suspect. Number Two is for a White suspect, Number Three is for a suspect of another race. Numerical Order is most likely based on either Baltimore's African American majority or African Americans being the most common criminal suspects in Baltimore in the eyes of the BPD.
Polygraph-by-Copier - A folk tale in police circles in which detectives use a photocopier as a faux- polygraph machine on a particularly dumb suspect; pages are loaded into the machine with "TRUE" or "LIE" on them and questions are asked to match them ("What is your name? Truth. And where do you live? Truth again. And did you or did you not kill Tater, shooting him down like a dog in the 1200 block of North Durham Street? Lie. Well, well: You lying motherfucker."). This was used in one episode of Homicide: Life on the Street, and also a Season 5 episode of The Wire. A story from the book notes that several cops in Detroit were punished for using this technique during interrogations.
Put down/Clear - To close a case, either by arresting a suspect or by establishing that the perpetrator is dead.
Red ball - A high-profile case that draws media and political attention. Red ball cases are investigated by all detectives on a shift and take precedence over existing active cases. They can and often do make or break a detective's career. They are also known as "shitstorms" and "clusterfucks." Examples during the book include the Latonya Wallace case (Pellegrini's first assignment as primary detective) and the Scott police-involved shooting. Red balls also include major cases that usually fall outside Homicide's jurisdiction, such as nonfatal police shootings.
Secretaries with guns - Derogatory term typically used by less reconstructed veterans for incompetent female detectives. There are some exceptions to this rule, Jenny Wehr and Bertina "Bert" Silver.
Smokehound- Derogatory term for a drunk
Squirrel - A criminal, a suspect, a rodent. Typically too cooperative during interrogations.
Stone Whodunit - A difficult case.
Toad - A derogatory term for blacks, specifically those who have or had a criminal history. Not usually applied to black policemen such as Sgt. Nolan or Detectives Brown, Edgerton, or Requer or Blacks in other legitimate jobs- if you earn a legal wage and do not have a BOI photograph in the system the book explains, "then you are a black man".
Ten Seven - police radio code for "out of service", may be applied to a homicide victim.
Ten Seventy-Eight - police radio code invented by McAllister to refer to "your basic blowjob-in-progress interrupted by police gunfire." This occurs twice in the course of the year, though only one is described in detail.
Yo - An insulting term for a black youth; often used as shorthand for black criminals along with "toad".
Yoette - A young black female. Unlike "yo", the term doesn't refer to the individuals as criminals.
Reception
Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets won the 1992 Edgar Award for Best Fact Crime book. [1] The Associated Press called it "a true-crime classic". [9] The Library Journal also highly recommended it, and Newsday described it as "one of the most engrossing police procedural mystery books ever written". [9] In 2010, it was announced that Simon had been awarded a MacArthur Fellowship , sometimes called a "genius award." [10] [11]
