The Lies of Locke Lamora is a fantasy novel by Scott Lynch. It follows the adventures of a group of con artists known as the Gentlemen Bastards. They live in a city called Camorr, heavily based on late medieval Venice. The book is divided into two interspersed stories. In the present time, the Gentlemen Bastards must contend with the Grey King, a powerful figure terrorizing Camorr's criminal community. Every other chapter, however, delves into the history and mythology of Camorr, the Gentlemen Bastards, and especially the protagonist Locke Lamora.
Plot summary
This article's plot summary may be too long or excessively detailed . Please help improve it by removing unnecessary details and making it more concise.
(June 2013)
Chains is a priest of the Crooked Warden, the god of thieves. He buys overambitious six-year old runt Locke for his gang, Gentlemen Bastards. Through a series of confidence tricks on the rich, they defy the Secret Peace, an unspoken agreement between the criminal underground and nobility of Camorr. In return for organized crime, nobility is off limits. The "Thorn of Camorr" steals from the rich, while Locke pretends to be a low-class sneak thief.
After Chains' death, Locke becomes garrista (leader) of the Gentlemen Bastards, masters of disguise, deception, and fine cuisine. The gang consists of huge Jean Tannen, an expert fighter, Calo and Galdo Sanza, jack-of-all-trades identical twins, Bug, a young apprentice and Sabetha, who doesn't appear in this novel.
Locke pretends to be Lukas Fehrwight, a merchant from a different city, to con Don Lorenzo Salvara and his wife. Meanwhile, a mysterious Gray King kills all the sub-leaders loyal to the Capa Barsavi, head of Camorr's criminal underworld. He forces Locke to don his Gray disguise and meet Barsavi.
To lure Barsavi from his secure fortress, the Gray King kills the Capa's only daughter. At the arranged meeting place, Barsavi beats the disguised Locke, thinking he is the Gray King, and leaves him to drown in the sea, where hidden Bug and Jean manage to save Locke. The three return to their underground temple home to find it vandalized, every penny stolen, and twins Calo and Galdo dead. When Bug is killed too, Locke swears revenge. He then goes to Barsavi's home. There, he, along with the most powerful garristas, witness the murder of the Barsavi family and trusted captains. Gray appears, takes the name "Capa Raza" and assumes leadership of the underworld.
Jean kills Gray's sisters, while Locke tries to complete the con against the Salvaras, already tipped off by Camorr's secret spymaster, known as the Duke's "Spider". At the Duke's annual celebration, Locke barely escapes. At their hideout, the Bondsmage awaits, having incapacitated Jean. Locke, who does not know his own true name, kills the scorpion-hawk familiar and tortures the mage for the truth. Wary of Bondsmagi revenge, they remove his fingers and tongue so he cannot gesture or speak spells, leaving him alive but insane.
Capa Raza has gone crazy, plotting revenge for the destruction of his family after his father opposed the Secret Peace. To destroy the Camorr nobles, he gifts four sculptures to the Duke of Camorr, actually timebombs filled with Wraithstone whose smoke renders creatures docile and without any personal initiative. His aim is to cause all nobles and their children to slide into moronic vapidity.
As for Capa Raza, he waits at the other end of the city for a ship to pick him up. Locke defuses the bombs first, then attack the Capa. Locke is completely outmatched, so he pretends to use one of his old tricks, namely holding Capa Raza until Jean arrives. Distracted, Capa Raza is killed by Locke himself. In addition, it is revealed that Locke tricked the Spider into sinking the ship where Gray hid their fortunes as a religious offering for his dead friends, and searching effluvia instead. In the end, Jean and injured Locke sail away to a new life.
Film adaptation
Warner Brothers bought the film rights soon after the book's release. The brothers Kevin and Dan Hageman were to write the screenplay, Michael De Luca and Julie Yorn to produce. [1]
