Cunt is a 1998 feminist book by Inga Muscio that called for a breakdown in the boundaries between women and sexuality. In it, the writer hopes to reverse the negative connotations behind female pejoratives. The books traverses such subjects as menstruation, rape, and competition between women. The Cuntlovin' Guide to the Universe in the back of the book is an index for information on all topics covered in the book.
LC Class
HQ1233 .M87 2002
Cunt is a 1998 feminist book by Inga Muscio that called for a breakdown in the boundaries between women and sexuality . [1] In it, the writer hopes to reverse the negative connotations behind female pejoratives . The books traverses such subjects as menstruation , rape , and competition between women. The Cuntlovin' Guide to the Universe in the back of the book is an index for information on all topics covered in the book.
Expanded Overview
Muscio begins by discussing the origins of the terms vagina and cunt . She makes the point that vagina is a medical term referring to a specific part of the female genitalia , while 'cunt,' despite its very negative usage, refers to "the whole package" of womanhood. She explains that 'cunt' is a powerful word, while vagina comes from the Latin meaning 'sword sheath' and concludes that she "ain't got no vagina".
The next section of the book discusses how women have been made to feel ashamed of menstruation , often being told that the pain and discomfort they experience is "all in their heads" and that women need to shower every day to avoid the extreme embarrassment of smelling like blood. Muscio described her own experience with a grade school sexual education class during which the boys were sent outside to play baseball while the girls watched a ridiculous video about the "creepy, cootie-laden mystery" of periods. She also attacks companies that produce so-called 'feminine hygiene' products for perpetuating these negative associations and for the high costs of such products. Muscio advocates creating a positive image of menstruation by throwing menarche parties, using moon calendars to familiarize oneself with biological rhythms, and reading Pippi Longstocking , a "superlative role model in the fine science of accepting ourselves." The book also suggests alternatives to pads and tampons , such as sea sponges , and The Diva Cup.
Next comes the topic of birth control . Muscio tells the stories of the three abortions she has had during her lifetime: two clinical abortions and one self-induced abortion. The clinical abortions are described as painful, impersonal experiences that are designed by men for women. Self-induced abortion, by means of abortive herbs, abdominal massages, and so forth, is advocated as being highly preferable to clinical abortions. Muscio also discusses how women's birth control methods can be upsetting and even physically harmful, and instead recommends condoms as a primary form of birth control.
Muscio then delves into the history of prostitution , citing the works of activist Carol Queen about the treatment of such women in ancient times, when prostitutes were sacred to some religions. Muscio states the need for women to reclaim 'Whoredom' and work to end the stigma surrounding it.
A long afterword describes others' reactions to the book, and also discusses the role and status of trans women within feminism and LGBT rights , a topic she had omitted in the first edition.
