Freaky Green Eyes (2003) was the third young-adult fiction novel written by Joyce Carol Oates. The story follows the life of 15-year-old Francesca "Franky" Pierson as she reflects on the events leading to her mother's mysterious disappearance. Through what she calls Freaky's thoughts, Franky accepts the truth about her mother's disappearance and her father's hand in it. Oates has said that the O. J Simpson case and the amount of media coverage it received inspired her to write "Freaky Green Eyes. " The novel's two primary themes, domestic violence and life in the media spotlight, raised questions about social taboo, teen anxiety and the relationship between silence and truth. The novel become a critical success. Publishers Weekly named Freaky Green Eyes one of the "Best Children's Books of 2003".
Krista's gay friend in Skagit Harbor. Reid thought he was Krista's lover.
Bonnie Lynn Byers
Reid's first wife and Todd's mother. She was killed in a boating accident. Reid was the only witness. Her case was reopened after Krista's case was concluded.
Themes
Effect of tabloid journalism
Oates has said that her inspiration for the book was, "the O.J. Simpson case without the whole racial angle" [3] The infamous O.J. Simpson case unfolded in 1994 with the discovery of O.J. Simpson's ex-wife, Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend, Ronald Goldman stabbed to death in Brown's home. The publicity during this case was greater than any murder trial seen, [4] due to Simpson's fame as former professional football player and actor. After nine months of the criminal trial, the jury returned a not-guilty verdict. Years after the trial's conclusion, the case remains a public obsession.[ citation needed ]
Oates described what was going on in the Simpson trial as " tabloid hell:" a person cannot go anywhere without someone knowing who they are and what was going on in their life. Similarly, in Freaky Green Eyes, Reid Pierson's character has much in common with O.J. Simpson. He's a former pro-football player (as was Simpson) and also a sports broadcaster (which Simpson was as well). It has been described in the book that Reid had a charismatic personality, which many say was characteristic of Simpson too. Oates said, "I'm focusing on how a person who is a celebrity is so admired that he casts a kind of aura, that people stare at the aura, and they don't really want to see that the person himself is somewhat stunted." [5] Oates wanted to shed some light on the society's mentality toward celebrities accused of grave crimes. People don't want to believe it because the person is famous. Through her novel, Oates is saying that just because someone (celebrity or not) presents himself or herself as something does not mean it is what they truly are. The novel makes that point when Reid Pierson is accused of being involved in the disappearance of Krista and Mero and the media makes up stories (or excuses). For example, the media came up with a story that Krista and Mero were lovers and decided to run away together.[ citation needed ]
Oates goes on to say that other events, such as the Monica Lewinsky controversy , show how tabloid journalism has gotten into society. She uses the Lewinsky case as an example because even the New York Times 's coverage of the scandal was similar to how tabloids cover stories. [6]
The meaning of "Freaky"
"Who would go in and let those animals out? Well, it wouldn't be me...But who would? Well, this girl". [7]
While Franky is the narrator, there are times in which the reader hears from someone else: Freaky, Franky's alter-ego. Throughout the novel, Franky tries to cope with and understand the whole situation. Most of the time she trusts that Reid tells her the truth. But that's where Freaky comes in. She tries to make Franky see the truth beyond Reid's lies, even though its not something Franky wants to believe. For example, when Reid tells Franky Krista will come back and Franky wants to believe him, Freaky tells her, "You know your mother is gone. You know she isn't coming back. Freaky knows." [2] Deep down, Franky knows her father had something to do with her mother's disappearance and that Krista was not coming back, but she didn't want to believe it. Freaky was trying to help Franky accept the truth.[ citation needed ]
Freaky was not only a guide to help Franky seek the truth, but she was also the source of Franky's ethics. During Franky's trip for the Fourth of July, she meets the boys who had been taking animals out of a wildlife refuge and placing them in cages on their property. They were under-feeding the animals and treating them poorly, so Franky does what's right, saying it was out of "Freaky Green Eyes rush". [2] Oates said Freaky was born out of her own inability to do things she wanted to do [7]
Freaky stopped Franky from being so naive and boosted her confidence in herself and her opinions. Without Freaky, Franky would not have been able to help solve the mystery about her mother. She wouldn't have been able to do the right thing.[ citation needed ]
Domestic violence
Krista (as well as Franky and Samantha) were all victims of Reid's domestic violence . The novel was written in a diary-like way from Franky's point of view after the fact, reflecting on the events leading to her mother's murder. The first sign of abuse was Krista wearing scarves and long sleeved shirts to cover up body parts, hiding the bruises underneath. Franky suspected it but never addressed it with her mother. Franky and Samantha had the attitude that silence was better, even though Reid abused them too. They even lied to the police when asked about if their parents had fought. Since Franky, Samantha and Krista were all silent about what had been going on, Reid never stopped abusing them. It has been said that, "silence is not a neutral act; rather, it is a politically regressive one that passively permits the continuation of violence". [8] After Franky investigates herself and finds Krista's diary, justice is done when Reid is arrested, convicted and sentenced.[ citation needed ]
This is not the first time Oates writes about domestic violence. Oates' 1985 novel Solstice tells another story of abuse but with a different attitude. The main character in that novel, Monica, never says she was in an abusive relationship even after her boyfriend left a large scar on her jaw. [9] Between these two books, Oates was showed how the view of domestic violence has change between the time the books were released. "The roughly 20 years between the publication of Solstice and Freaky Green Eyes do represent a paradigm shift in our thinking, but the ultimate message of Freaky Green Eyes is that American society [circa 2003] still has a long way to go in terms of how we deal with the problem." [10] The problem still relevant today is: Reid never would have been punished without Franky's sole detective work. It would not be surprising if in 2020 Oates writes another novel with the same domestic violence theme and shows how society reacts to it then. [10]
Reception
Freaky Green Eyes received positive reviews. ALA Booklist called it a, "fast-paced, first-person thriller." The Boston Herald named it one of 2003's, "most compelling fiction". Publishers Weekly gave Freaky Green Eyes a starred review saying that, “Oates builds the mounting tension masterfully, crafting a fast-paced narrative that will haunt readers long after the final page." [11]
This is the book cover of the paperback version.
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes. New York: HarperTempest, 2003. Oclc 181100387
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes. New York: HarperTempest, 2003. Oclc 50598191
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes. Prince Frederick, MD: Recorded Books , Inc, 2004. Oclc 55377460
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes. Prince Frederick, Md: Recorded Books, 2004. Oclc 56081594
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes.Prince Frederick, Md: Recorded Books, 2004. Oclc 56479447
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes. Prince Frederick, Md: Recorded Books, 2004. Oclc 56596419
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes. Prince Frederick, Md: Recorded Books, 2004. Oclc 56604722
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes. London: HarperCollins Children's Books, 2004. Oclc 58831346
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes . London: Collins, 2004. Oclc 56645948
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes. London: HarperCollins Children's Books, 2004. Oclc 475267044
Oates, Joyce Carol, and Stina Nielsen. Freaky Green Eyes. Prince Frederick, MD: Recorded Books, 2004. Oclc 55154644
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes. New York: HarperTempest, 2005. Oclc 57723099
Oates, Joyce Carol. Freaky Green Eyes [Hauptbd.]. Braunschweig: Diesterweg, 2008. Oclc 426146741
Similar books from Oates
Other novels by Joyce Carol Oates with similar themes and/or protagonists:
Solstice
