Ender's Game (1985) is a science fiction novel by American author Orson Scott Card. Set in Earth's future, the novel presents an imperiled humankind who have barely survived two conflicts with the Formics (an insectoid alien species; normally called "Buggers" by most of the population). These aliens show an ant-like group behavior, and are very protective of their leader, much like Earth ants protecting their queen. In preparation for an anticipated third invasion, an international fleet maintains a school to find and train future fleet commanders. The world's most talented children, including the novel's protagonist, Ender Wiggin, are taken at a very young age to a training center known as the Battle School. There, teachers train them in the arts of war through increasingly difficult games including ones undertaken in zero gravity in the Battle Room, where Ender's tactical genius is revealed. The book originated as the short story "Ender's Game", published in the August 1977 issue of Analog Science Fiction and Fact. Elaborating on characters and plot lines depicted in the novel, Card later wrote additional books to form the Ender's Game series. Card released an updated version of Ender's Game in 1991, changing some political facts to accurately reflect the times. Reception of the book has generally been positive, though some critics have denounced Card's perceived justification of his characters' violent actions. It has also become suggested reading for many military organizations, including the United States Marine Corps. Ender's Game won the 1985 Nebula Award for best novel and the 1986 Hugo Award for best novel. Its sequels, Ender in Exile, Speaker for the Dead, Xenocide, and Children of the Mind, follow Ender's subsequent travels to many different worlds in the galaxy. In addition, the later novella A War of Gifts and novel Ender's Shadow take place during the same time period as the original. Ender's Game has been adapted into two comic series. A film adaptation of the same name directed by Gavin Hood and starring Asa Butterfield as Ender is planned for release on November 1, 2013. Card is co-producing the film.
e
Humanity, having begun to explore the Universe and master interplanetary spaceflight , has encountered an alien race known as the "buggers" (known in later books as the 'Formics'), scouting the system and establishing a forward base in the asteroid Eros , who provoked two drawn-out wars. Despite political conflict on Earth between three ruling parties (the Hegemon, Polemarch, and Strategos), a peace was established and an International Fleet (IF) formed against the Buggers. In preparation for the Buggers' return (dubbed the "third invasion") the IF created the Battle School, a program designed to subject children with the best tactical minds to rigorous training.
Protagonist Andrew "Ender" Wiggin is one of the school's trainees; but despite this, is teased as a "Third" under Earth's two-child policy. He has a close bond with his sister Valentine , but fears his brother Peter , a highly intelligent sociopath . After the IF removes Ender's monitoring device, presumably ending his chances of Battle School, he fights a fellow student, Stilson. Though the weaker of the two, Ender fatally wounds Stilson, but is left unaware of doing so. When explaining his actions to IF Colonel Hyrum Graff , Ender states his belief that, by showing superiority now, he has prevented future struggle. Graff, on hearing of this, offers Ender a place in the Battle School, situated in Earth's orbit, where Graff quickly isolates Ender from the other cadets, but encourages him to continue training despite frustration, through communications from Valentine.
The cadets participate in competitive war simulations in zero gravity, wherein Ender's innovations disrupt the standard operations. Graff promotes Ender to a new army composed of the newest and youngest cadets, which Ender leads to the top of the school. There, Ender fights Bonzo Madrid, a jealous commander of another army, outside the simulation, and unknowingly kills him. Under Ender's leadership, several of his current and former squad members form 'Ender's Jeesh' that remain loyal to him.
On Earth, Peter Wiggin has used a global communication system to post political essays under the pseudonym " Locke ", hoping to establish himself as a respected orator and thence as a powerful politician. Valentine, despite not trusting Peter, publishes works alongside his as " Demosthenes ". Their essays are soon taken seriously by the government. Though Graff is told their true identities, he recommends that it be kept a secret, because their writings are politically useful.
Command School
Ender, now ten years old, is soon promoted to Command School (on asteroid 433 Eros ), skipping several years of schooling. There, he is tutored by a former war hero, Mazer Rackham . Alongside other training activities, Mazer sets virtual fleets under Ender's control against Bugger fleets controlled by Mazer. Ender adapts to the game and, as the simulations become harder, receives members of his Jeesh as sub-commanders. Despite this, Ender becomes depressed by the simulations, by his isolation from others, and by his treatment by Mazer.
When told by Mazer that he is facing his final test, Ender finds his human fleet far-outnumbered by the Buggers and sacrifices most of his fighters to launch a Molecular Disruption Device, capable of destroying the entire planet, intending to earn himself expulsion from the school for his ruthlessness. The Device destroys the planet and the entire Bugger fleet, but as the simulation ends, Ender is surprised to find the IF commanders celebrating. Mazer returns, and informs Ender that this – and earlier skirmishes in the "simulator" – were not simulation, but the actual IF contingent and the Buggers' main fleet at their homeworld, and with their destruction Ender has terminated the war. Ender becomes more depressed on learning this and of the deaths of Stilson and Bonzo.
When he recovers, he finds himself still in orbit with his closest friends and learns that, at the end of the Bugger war, Earth's powers fought among themselves. He stays on Eros as his friends return home and colonists venture to other worlds, using Eros as a way station. Among the first colonists is his sister, Valentine, who apologizes that Ender can never return to Earth, where he would become dangerous as used by the various leaders, including Peter. Instead, Ender joins the colony program to populate one of the Buggers' former worlds. There, he discovers the dormant egg of a Bugger queen. The queen, through telepathy, explains that the Buggers had initially assumed humans were a non-sentient race, for want of collective consciousness , but realized their mistake too late, and requests that Ender take the egg to a new planet to colonize.
Ender takes the egg and, with information from the Queen, writes The Hive Queen under the alias " Speaker for the Dead ". Peter, now the Hegemon of Earth, recognizes Ender's work and requests Ender to write a book about him, which Ender entitles Hegemon. The combined works create a new type of funeral, in which the Speaker for the Dead tells the whole and unapologetic story of the deceased, that is adopted by many on Earth and its colonies. In the end, Ender and Valentine board a series of starships and visit many worlds, looking for a safe place to establish the unborn Hive Queen.
Critical response
Critics have generally received Ender's Game well. The novel won the Nebula Award for best novel in 1985, [10] and the Hugo Award for best novel in 1986, [11] considered the two most prestigious awards in science fiction. [12] [13] Ender's Game was also nominated for a Locus Award in 1986. [6] In 1999, it placed #59 on the reader's list of Modern Library 100 Best Novels . It was also honored with a spot on American Library Association 's "100 Best Books for Teens." In 2008, the novel, along with Ender's Shadow , won the Margaret A. Edwards Award , which honors an author and specific works by that author for lifetime contribution to young adult literature. [14] Ender's Game was included in Damien Broderick 's book Science Fiction: The 101 Best Novels 1985–2010. [15]
New York Times writer Gerald Jonas asserts that the novel's plot summary resembles a "grade Z, made-for-television, science-fiction rip-off movie", but says that Card develops the elements well despite this "unpromising material". Jonas further praises the development of the character Ender Wiggin : "Alternately likable and insufferable, he is a convincing little Napoleon in short pants." [16]
The novel has received negative criticism for violence and its justification. Elaine Radford 's review, "Ender and Hitler: Sympathy for the Superman", posits that Ender Wiggin is an intentional reference by Card to Adolf Hitler and criticizes the violence in the novel, particularly at the hands of the protagonist. [2] Card responded to Radford's criticisms in Fantasy Review, the same publication. Radford's criticisms are echoed in John Kessel 's essay "Creating the Innocent Killer: Ender's Game, Intention, and Morality", wherein Kessel states: "Ender gets to strike out at his enemies and still remain morally clean. Nothing is his fault." [3]
The U.S. Marine Corps Professional Reading List makes the novel recommended reading at several lower ranks, and again at Officer Candidate/Midshipman. [17] The book was placed on the reading list by Captain John F. Schmitt , author of FMFM-1 (Fleet Marine Fighting Manual, on maneuver doctrine) for "provid[ing] useful allegories to explain why militaries do what they do in a particularly effective shorthand way." [18] In introducing the novel for use in leadership training, Marine Corps University's Lejeune program opines that it offers "lessons in training methodology, leadership, and ethics as well [....] Ender's Game has been a stalwart item on the Marine Corps Reading List since its inception." [18]
