This is about a book called The Code Book, for other uses see Codebook (disambiguation) The Code Book Author(s) Simon SinghCountry U.K. Language EnglishGenre(s) FactualPublisher Fourth EstatePublication date September 1999Pages 416 pp (first edition)ISBN 978-1-85702-879-9OCLC Number 59459928 The Code Book: The Science of Secrecy from Ancient Egypt to Quantum Cryptography is a book written by Simon Singh and published in 1999 by Doubleday of New York; ISBN 0-385-49531-5. The Code Book covers a diverse set of historical topics including the Man in the Iron Mask, Arabic cryptography, Charles Babbage, the mechanisation of cryptography, the Enigma Machine, and the decipherment of Linear B and other ancient writing systems. Later sections cover the development of public key cryptography and some of this material is based on interviews with the participants, including those who worked in secret at GCHQ. The book concludes with a discussion of PGP, quantum computing, and quantum cryptography. The book announced a "Cipher Challenge" of a series of ten progressively harder codes with a cash prize of £10,000, which has since been won. http://simonsingh. net/cryptography/cipher-challenge The book is not footnoted but has a "Further Reading" section at the end, organized by chapter.
The Code Book covers diverse historical topics including the Man in the Iron Mask , Arabic cryptography , Charles Babbage , the mechanisation of cryptography, the Enigma machine , and the decryption of Linear B and other ancient writing systems.
Later sections cover the development of public-key cryptography . Some of this material is based on interviews with participants, including persons who worked in secret at GCHQ .
The book concludes with a discussion of " pretty good privacy " (PGP), quantum computing , and quantum cryptography .
The book announced a "cipher challenge" of a series of ten progressively harder ciphers, with a cash prize of Â£10,000 which has since been won. [1]
The book is not footnoted but has a "Further Reading" section at the end, organized by chapter.
