The Washington Square News is the daily student newspaper of New York University and serves the NYU, Greenwich Village, and East Village communities. The paper, better known as WSN, has a circulation of 10,000 and an estimated 65,000 readers online. It is published Monday through Thursday during the fall and spring semesters and online on Friday, with additional issues published in the summer. WSN is run solely by NYU students, with the paper's senior staff composed of undergraduates. Its offices are located at 838 Broadway. The paper is editorially independent from the university and is solely responsible in selling advertisements to fund its production. The term for the position of editor-in-chief is one calendar year, beginning in the spring semester and ending in the fall semester. The term for all other editorial positions is one semester. The editor-in-chief for Spring and Fall 2013 is Jonathon Dornbush.
History
The newspaper was born in 1973 as the result of NYU's merging of their two campuses: the University Heights campus in the Bronx had published the Heights Daily News, while the Washington Square campus in Lower Manhattan originally published the Washington Square Bulletin.
In 2000, WSN launched its website nyunews.com .
Awards
In 2009, reporters Marc Beja and Adam Playford (Editor-in-Chief, 2008) won 1st place in the category of "Best News Story" from the New York State Press Association and National Winner in the category of "In-depth reporting" from the Society of Professional Journalists. At the same time Alvin Chang (Editor-in-Chief, 2007) won best columnist.
Washington Square News won an Associated Collegiate Press Pacemaker award in 2004, that same year it was awarded the title of Overall Best Newspaper. [2]
In 2003, the paper won seven first-place awards in the Division 1 "Better College Newspaper Contest" of the New York State Press Association .
Notable former staff
Bill Bastone, editor, The Smoking Gun
Cindy Behrman, Advertising Editor, Suddler & Hennesey; writer, Village Voice and New York Press (deceased July 22, 2008)
