Endless Night is a work of crime fiction by Agatha Christie, first published in the UK by the Collins Crime Club on 30 October 1967 and in the US by Dodd, Mead and Company the following year. The UK edition retailed at eighteen shillings (18/-) and the US edition at $4.95. It was one of her favourites of her own works and received some of the warmest critical notices of her career upon publication.
The title comes from William Blake 's Auguries of Innocence :
Every night and every morn,
Some to misery are born,
Every morn and every night,
Some are born to sweet delight.
Some are born to sweet delight,
Some are born to endless night.
Plot summary
Michael Rogers is a lazy and nonchalant philanderer, and narrates the story. He has a close relationship with his friend, Rudolf Santonix, who is a famous architect with ambitions to one day build a house for Michael. While passing through a village, he meets Fenella "Ellie" Guteman, the daughter of a wealthy American businessman, who yearns for a life outside of her judgmental and pompous family. Ellie and Michael fall in love with each other, and they decide to marry.
Excited by the prospect of their new life, Ellie is able to fund the building of Gipsy's Acre, their new modern home by the sea. Michael requests Santonix to build the house, to which he agrees, albeit oddly reluctant. While in the village, the couple come across many of the villagers, such as Victoria Hardcastle, a local young girl who shares Ellie's love of horse riding, and Miss Esther Lee, a sinister elderly spinster who tells Ellie to leave the village, or fate will curse her. Matters are made worse when Ellie's childhood au pair, Greta Anderson, is invited to stay at the house, only to be vigorously disliked by Michael who repeatedly gets into heated arguments with her.
Ellie begins to become more suspicious of the dangers of Gipsy's Acre,and becomes more frightened of Miss Lee's increasing hostility towards her. Then, after being missing for several hours, Ellie's body is found in the woods, her skull caved in from when her horse apparently threw her off.A now melancholy Michael has to travel to America in order to receive the inheritance of Ellie's will, which she bequeathed to him. While in America, Michael receives a letter from the village, which tells him that the bodies of Miss Lee and Victoria Hardcastle had been discovered, indicating that Ellie's death was not an accident.
Upon returning to the village, it is revealed to the reader the true nature of Michael's intent: He had met Greta Anderson a few years ago and they had instantly fallen in love together. Though they had each other, they were both desperately poor and needed a source of income, which Greta claimed to be able to provide- Ellie. They agreed to a plan in which Michael would marry Ellie in order to gain her inheritance, then murder her and proceed to marry Greta.
Michael killed Ellie by poisoning her allergy medicine, which she used in order to ride her horses. The slow- acting cyanide would then kill her while riding, making it look like the horse killed her. Michael, having paid Miss Lee to frighten Ellie in order to throw suspicion on her, killed Miss Lee by throwing her off a quarry, so as to remove her as a witness. The death of Victoria was an accident; Victoria had borrowed some of Ellie's allergy medicine in order to ride her horse, and so had died in the same way. While Michael and Greta celebrate their victory, Michael begins to break down. He tells Greta that he had only ever used her to get money, even confessing that he murdered two of his childhood friends just to steal their money. Michael becomes enraged at the thought that if he had stayed married to Ellie, they would have lived happily together, and viciously strangles Greta to death. At the end of the book, Michael silently waits to be arrested as the villagers find him and Greta's body in the house.
Literary significance and reception
The novel is dedicated: "whom I first heard the legend of Gipsy's Acre." Nora Prichard was the paternal grandmother of Mathew, Christie's only grandson. Gipsy's Acre was a field located on a Welsh moorland. The Times Literary Supplement of 16 November 1967 said, "It really is bold of Agatha Christie to write in the persona of a working-class boy who marries a poor little rich girl, but in a pleasantly gothic story of gypsy warnings she brings it all off, together with a nicely melodramatic final twist." [5]
The Guardian carried a laudatory review in its issue of 10 November 1967 by Francis Iles ( Anthony Berkeley Cox ) who said, "The old maestrina of the crime-novel (or whatever is the female of 'maestro') pulls yet another out of her inexhaustible bag with Endless Night, quite different in tone from her usual work. It is impossible to say much about the story without giving away vital secrets: sufficient to warn the reader that if he should think this is a romance he couldn't be more mistaken, and the crashing, not to say horrific suspense at the end is perhaps the most devastating that this surpriseful author has ever brought off." [6]
Maurice Richardson in The Observer of 5 November 1967 began, "She changes her style again and makes a determined and quite suspenseful attempt to be with it." He finished, "I shan't give away who murders whom, but the suspense is kept up all the way and Miss Christie's new demi-tough, streamlined style really does come off. She'll be wearing black leather pants next, if she isn't already." [7] The poet and novelist Stevie Smith chose the novel as one of her Books of the Year in the same newspaper's issue of 10 December 1967 when she said, "I mostly read Agatha Christie this year (and every year). I wish I could write more about what she does for one in the way of lifting the weight, and so on." [8]
Robert Barnard : "The best of the late Christies, the plot a combination of patterns used in Ackroyd and Nile (note similarities in treatment of heiress/heroine's American lawyers in Nile and here, suggesting she had been rereading). The murder occurs very late, and thus the central section seems desultory, even novelettish (poor little rich girl, gypsy's curse, etc.). But all is justified by the conclusion. A splendid late flowering." [9]
References to other works
While the novel uses elements of the supernatural that feature rarely in Christie ( By The Pricking of My Thumbs being a noticeable example), the novel's denouement is similar to that of The Murder of Roger Ackroyd in that Michael is revealed to be a twisted, mentally unstable man who is also the murderer. The plot also uses some elements similar to those of the Miss Marple story, The Case of the Caretaker from Miss Marple's Final Cases (1979).
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
Endless Night (1972 Film)
Main article: ' Endless Night '
A 1972 film was made, starring Hayley Mills , Britt Ekland , Per Oscarsson , Hywel Bennett and George Sanders (who committed suicide before the film's release). Christie reportedly had some reservations about the use of sex scenes to enliven the plot.
Saturday Theatre (BBC Radio 4)
Endless Night was presented as a one-hour radio play in the Saturday Theatre strand on BBC Radio 4 on 30 August 2008 at 2.30pm. The play's recording took place at Broadcasting House and had an original score composed by Nicolai Abrahamsen.
Adaptor: Joy Wilkinson
