Not to be confused with Kings of Tort, a book written by Alan Lange, editor of the website, Y'all Politics. The King of Torts Author(s) John GrishamCountry United StatesLanguage EnglishGenre(s) Legal thriller novelPublisher DoubledayPublication date 2003Media type PrintISBN 0-385-50804-2OCLC Number 51033987 The King of Torts was a title bestowed on Melvin M. Belli an Internationally renowned trial attorney by Time magazine in the late 1950 to early 1960s as a result of his legendary work and results in the field of personal injury. It is also the title of a novel by famed author James Grisham 0teh 19603is a legal/suspense novel written by American author John Grisham. The first edition was published in hardcover format by Doubleday in 2003, and immediately debuted at #1 on the New York Times Best Sellers list, remaining in the top 15 for over twenty weeks. Dell Publishing published the paperback edition later in 2003.
Plot
Clay Carter is a poorly-paid lawyer at the Office of the Public Defender. He dreams of one day joining a big law firm. Reluctantly, he takes on the case of Tequila Watson, a man accused of a random street killing. Clay assumes that it is just another D.C. murder.
But Clay soon learns of a pharmaceutical conspiracy, with the help of the mysterious Max Pace. The pharmaceutical company was illegally using recovering drug addicts for medical trials without their consent. The drug, 'Tarvan', works for 90% of their patients, but in some cases (including Tequila Watson), it leads to random violent killings.
The drug company employs Pace and his shadowy associates to solicit Clay's help in paying off the victims with large settlements. Clay has reservations, but soon profits from the legal retainer offered by Pace. He leaves the OPD and raids some of their staff to establish his own law firm.
Pace offers Clay insider information on the dangers of another drug (Dyloft and Maxatil). Clay uses this information to launch a new career in Tort Law. Soon he finds himself being one of the legal profession's biggest tort lawyers and conniving with other high-powered tort lawyers. But this sudden fame isn't without a price and soon he's under investigation for various misdemeanors, including insider trading. In the end, Clay is beaten up by some men from Reedsburgh, sending him to the hospital. Then he loses a huge case against Goffman and slides downhill as previous, disgruntled clients sue him. In the end he runs away with Rebecca to London.
List of characters
Max Pace - a mysterious adviser of Clay Carter
Tequila Watson - later restyled as Paul Watson
Adelfa Pumphrey
