The Testament is a legal thriller by American author John Grisham. It was published in hardcover by Doubleday on February 2, 1999.
0-09-924502-7
The Testament is a legal thriller by American author John Grisham . It was published in hardcover by Doubleday on February 2, 1999. Stuart Blumberg has announced that he will direct the adaption into film with John Heard playing the elderly billionaire.
Plot
Troy Phelan, an eccentric elderly billionaire, has written many wills during his life, but right before he dies by suicide, he leaves one final will, a holographic will , as a last surprise. He then leaps from a balcony to his death. He leaves his vast fortune to an illegitimate daughter, Rachel Lane, instead of his six children by three marriages. Her existence comes as a total surprise to everyone. His reason is revulsion over years of fighting with, and embarrassment from, his family, as well as their greed — much of which was due to his neglect of his children and multiple affairs (both personal and business).
His lawyers are now tasked with protecting Troy's wishes as well as finding the heiress. Nate O'Riley, a high-powered litigation lawyer and now recovering alcoholic, is sent to Brazil , where Rachel is believed to be living as a missionary .
While Nate is trying to find Rachel, Troy's family does everything in their power to contest the new will. They argue that although Troy was examined by three of the top psychiatrists in the nation, he was lacking sanity at the time of the new will.
The journey into the Pantanal of South America by way of Corumbá nearly kills Nate, but finally he and his guide locate the tribe with which Rachel Lane is living. She refuses the legacy or anything connected with it. Nate is unable to convince her otherwise, and returns to the United States after contracting dengue fever from a mosquito.
In the meantime, the ex-wives, children and respective lawyers continue attempting to destroy and disprove all evidence of Troy Phelan's sanity and even the will itself. They finally decide not to contest the will in court, fearing that their testimony during the deposition will further hurt their case. They also realize that two witnesses for the plaintiff are lying and would be torn to shreds by Nate should a trial ever take place. To settle the matter, Nate agrees that the relatives of Troy Phelan will be paid $50 million each (minus lawyers' fees) to stop turning the will contest into a legal quagmire.
When all is over, Nate returns to the jungle in order to get Rachel to sign off on the settlement, but when he arrives he learns that Rachel has died from malaria . She has, however, left instructions that the money be put into trust for the benefit of the indigenous peoples and that Nate will have control of the trust. The end of the book shows Nate riding off in a boat into the Pantanal, not caring if it took a month to get back to civilization.
Characters in "The Testament"
Troy Phelan, an eccentric, reclusive, ruthless billionaire businessman, commits suicide. In order to cut his family out of his will, he makes a fake will a few hours before his suicide, putting his family into that will. Minutes before his suicide, he shows his lawyer a new will that he would like carried out. This will leaves only enough money to each of his heirs to pay off their debts up until the day of his death, and leaves everything else to Rachel Lane, an illegitimate daughter that none of his family and associates have known about.
Josh Stafford, Troy's lawyer, confidante and executor, must find Rachel, but he knows only that she is a missionary somewhere in Brazil. He decides to assign Nate O'Riley, former high-powered litigator and recovering alcoholic, to find her. Nate is emerging from his fourth stay in rehab, and he reluctantly agrees to go. Josh manipulates the situation from behind the scenes.
Rachel Lane, an illegitimate daughter who Troy wills eleven billion dollars to. She is a missionary in Brazil who wants nothing to do with the money, and refuses to sign any legal papers. She was re-contacted by her father when she was a teenager. Troy paid for her to study at college, but she then disappeared into medical school and seminary.
Nate O'Riley, the lawyer sent to find Rachel Lane. He has been off-and-on drugs/alcohol several times, crashing harder every time. A workoholic whose habits have shattered both of his marriages, he is sent to Brazil to get him away from the office, where he falls in love with Rachel. He has two children from his first marriage and two younger children from his second marriage.
The Phelan Children, six children that were born to three different woman (a seventh one died in a car accident). All of them, despite being given The Gift of $5 million at the age of 21 - are either broke or heavily in debt. They are desperate for a cut of Troy's wealth, and employ even greedier lawyers.
Film adaption
According to The Hollywood Reporter , Fox 2000 and New Regency agreed in 2009 to develop a film adaptation of The Testament. Stuart Blumberg has recently announced that he will direct the adaption into film with John Heard playing the elderly billionaire and will also star Ellie Goulding and Nicole Appleton .
