The Golden Notebook is a 1962 novel by Doris Lessing. This book, as well as the couple that followed it, enters the realm of what Margaret Drabble in The Oxford Companion to English Literature has called Lessing's "inner space fiction", her work that explores mental and societal breakdown. The book also contains a powerful anti-war and anti-Stalinist message, an extended analysis of communism and the Communist Party in England from the 1930s to the 1950s, and a famed examination of the budding sexual and women's liberation movements. The Golden Notebook has been translated into a number of other languages. In 2005, the novel was chosen by TIME magazine as one of the one hundred best English-language novels from 1923 to present.
Plot summary
The Golden Notebook is the story of writer Anna Wulf, the four notebooks in which she records her life, and her attempt to tie them together in a fifth, gold-coloured, notebook. The book intersperses segments of an ostensibly realistic narrative of the lives of Molly and Anna, and their children, ex-husbands and lovers—entitled Free Women—with excerpts from Anna's four notebooks, coloured black (of Anna's experience in Southern Rhodesia , before and during WWII, which inspired her own best-selling novel), red (of her experience as a member of the Communist Party), yellow (an ongoing novel that is being written based on the painful ending of Anna's own love affair), and blue (Anna's personal journal where she records her memories, dreams, and emotional life). Each notebook is returned to four times, interspersed with episodes from Free Women, creating non-chronological, overlapping sections that interact with one another. This post-modern styling, with its space for "play" engaging the characters and readers, is among the most famous features of the book, although Lessing insisted that readers and reviewers pay attention to the serious themes in the novel.[ citation needed ]
Major themes
All four notebooks and the frame narrative testify to the above themes of Stalinism, the Cold War and the threat of nuclear conflagration, and women's struggles with the conflicts of work, sex, love, maternity, and politics.[ citation needed ] However, Lessing herself in the preface claimed that the most important theme in the novel is fragmentation; the mental breakdown that Anna suffers, perhaps from the compartmentalization of her life reflected in the division of the four notebooks, but also reflecting the fragmentation of society. Her relationship and attempt to draw everything together in the golden notebook at the end of the novel are both the final stage of Anna's intolerable mental breakdown, and her attempt to overcome the fragmentation and madness.
Anna (Freeman) Wulf: Writer. Main character of Free Women and writer of the Notebooks.
Max Wulf: Anna’s ex-husband
Janet Wulf: Anna and Max’s daughter
Molly Jacobs: Actress, Anna’s friend.
Richard Portmain: Molly’s ex-husband
Tommy Portmain: Molly and Richards’s son
Marion Portmain: Richard’s second wife
Michael: Anna’s former lover
Willi (Wilhelm) Rodde (Black Notebook): Anna’s boyfriend, refugee from Germany, based on Max Wulf.
Paul Blackenhurst (Black Notebook): Royal Air Force Pilot
Ted Brown (Black Notebook): Royal Air Force pilot, socialist.
Jimmy McGrath (Black Notebook): Royal Air Force pilot. Homosexual.
George Hounslow (Black Notebook): Worked on roads.
Maryrose (Black Notebook): Paul and George's love interest, born in Southern Rhodesia
Mr Boothyby (Black Notebook): Proprietor of the Mashopi Hotel
Mrs Boothby (Black Notebook): Proprietor of the Mashopi Hotel
June Boothby (Black Notebook): Daughter of Mr & Mrs Boothby
Jackson (Black Notebook): Cook at the Mashopi Hotel. Friend of Jimmy.
Marie (Black Notebook): Jackson’s wife. Has an affair with George.
Ella (Yellow Notebook): Based on Anna Wulf. Writes for a women's magazine.
Julia (Yellow Notebook): Based on Molly Jacobs
Dr West (Yellow Notebook): Writes a medical column under the name Dr Allsop for the women's magazine.
Patricia Brent (Yellow Notebook): Editor
George (Yellow Notebook): Based on Max Wulf
Paul Tanner (Yellow Notebook): Ella’s lover
Michael (Yellow Notebook): Ella’s son
Saul Green (Blue and Golden Notebooks): American writer
Milt (Free Women 5): American writer (= Saul Green from the Blue and Golden Notebooks)
Mother Sugar: A psychoanalyst
Tom Mathlong (Free Women): African political activist
Charlie Themba (Free Women 4): Trade union leader, friend of Tom Mathlong
