Waylander II: In the Realm of the Wolf, published in 1992, is a novel in the Drenai series of British fantasy writer David Gemmell. While the novels of the series are all based in the same universe, most of them can not be described as direct sequels with some consecutive installments having as much as 1000 years between them. With Waylander II, Gemmell changes this by taking up the story from his earlier novel Waylander. Some ten years have passed since the conclusion of the Vagrian Wars. Waylander the Slayer, the legendary warrior, has disappeared, but a contract has been put out on his life. A secret society of trained assassins dispatches its human hounds on his trail, and other dark forces are at work.
The First Chronicles of Druss the Legend
Waylander II: In the Realm of the Wolf, published in 1992, is a novel in the Drenai series of British fantasy writer David Gemmell . While the novels of the series are all based in the same universe, most of them can not be described as direct sequels with some consecutive installments having as much as 1000 years between them. With Waylander II, Gemmell changes this by taking up the story from his earlier novel Waylander . Some ten years have passed since the conclusion of the Vagrian Wars. Waylander the Slayer , the legendary warrior, has disappeared, but a contract has been put out on his life. A secret society of trained assassins dispatches its human hounds on his trail, and other dark forces are at work.
Plot summary
High in the wooded, peaked mountains of Skeln, the woodsman Dakeyras, and his beautiful daughter Miriel live a life of harmonious solitude, while her twin sister, Krylla, has married and moved away. A group of grim-eyed members of the assassins guild stalk Waylander, for a bounty of ten thousand in gold put on his head by Karnak after Karnak's son Bodalen and his friends caused the death of his daughter Krylla and murdered her husband. Warriors like Belash of the Nadir, from the Wolfshead tribe, Morak the deadly swordsman with a taste for torture and Senta the young, good looking Gladiator who has never been beaten.
Battle-hardened warriors all, they have no fear of this task - yet they should have. For Miriel is a woman of fire and iron, skilled with bow and blade and taught her skills by one of the deadliest killers of all time: Her father, Dakeyras, better known as Waylander the Slayer.
This article about a 1990s fantasy novel is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
