Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen is a young adult novel by Dyan Sheldon. Originally released in 1999 through Candlewick Press, it was later turned into a Disney motion picture of the same name in 2004 starring Lindsay Lohan and was made one of the ALA book picks for 2006. A sequel, My Perfect Life, was released in 2002.
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen (novel)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen
Author
50617203
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen is a young adult novel by Dyan Sheldon . Originally released in 1999 through Candlewick Press , it was later turned into a Disney motion picture of the same name in 2004 starring Lindsay Lohan and was made one of the ALA book picks for 2006. [1] A sequel, My Perfect Life , was released in 2002.
Contents
Plot summary
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen follows the character of Mary Elizabeth "Lola" Cep as she moves to New Jersey with her family and attempts to become the Queen Bee at Dellwood High. In order to become so she must contend with Carla Santini, who has no intention of vacating her place in school society. Both end up vying for the lead in the school play, with the feud only getting worse after the breakup of Lola's favorite band. When Carla gets VIP passes to the band's last concert and the after party, Lola says she and her best friend Ella Gerard are going also. They sneak away to New York , get kicked out of the concert, then find the lead singer drunk and on the side of the road, which eventually leads to them getting to the after party.
Lola and Ella return to school the next day, eager to boast to Carla about their antics at the afterparty, but are humiliated when Carla succeeds in convincing everyone else they never attended. Lola goes home, upset, and decides not to perform in the school play. But she changes her mind the night of the play after Ella tells her off, and Lola rushes to school to take on her role as the lead. The book ends with the play as a success and with Lola and Carla in the bathroom fixing up their make up for the after party while they acknowledge each other.
Reception
Critical reception for Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen was positive, with Booklist calling it "hilarious" and "truly funny". [2] Publishers Weekly positively reviewed the book, praising Lola's "wit and charm". [3] Kirkus Reviews also positively reviewed the book, citing the supporting cast as one of the highlights of the book. [4]
