The Keeping Place is a science fiction novel by Isobelle Carmody, set in a post apocalyptic world. It is the fourth book in the Obernewtyn Chronicles.
Synopsis
After a kidnapping, the Misfit community at Obernewtyn are forced to join the rebellion against the totalitarian Council, using their extraordinary mental abilities. Yet Elspeth must also seek out clues left by a long-dead seer, Kasanda, necessary to her quest to destroy the Beforetime weaponmachines. When one is hidden in the past, Elspeth must travel the Dreamtrails, stalked by a terrifying beast, with Maruman, her cat, as guide and protector. Only now can she learn more of the Beforetime Misfits and their enemy, Govamen, and realise her quest is intimately linked with the Misfit's Obernewtyn - its past and its future. [1]
Plot
Rushton is kidnapped, by an unknown person. The Misfits receive a letter telling them that he has been kidnapped and that they will kill him if the Misfits do not join the rebellion. The Misfits think that it must be a rebel who has kidnapped him, but it was not. Rushton was initially summoned to Sutrium, and attended a rebel meeting. The rebels asked him if the Misfits would join the rebellion, but Rushton declined after a new policy the Misfits set themselves after the Battlegames in Sador (see Ashling). The Misfits join the rebellion, only to be betrayed by the Misfit-hating rebel, Malik. Many Misfits and beasts are killed by soldierguards. The rebellion is won, but the west coast is still occupied by the Council after a rebel or Misfit traitor spread the news. The Misfits could not identify the traitor, most likely because he or she wore a demon band, a tainted band made by the Herders to ward off evil, though it actually works on Misfits. Meanwhile the Misfits at Obernewtyn are having their dreams haunted by a dragon, Dragon's form on the Dreamtrails, but Dragon cannot control it. The Misfits are all in Sutrium after the rebellion and then return. Elspeth goes to the City under Mount. Tor and dives, to find a statue of herself! Made by Kasanda. Elspeth then enters Dragon's mind, with Maruman and finds Rushton in there. Elspeth learns a lot about the Red Queen, who is Dragon. After she leaves Dragon's mind, Dragon is awakened from her coma. And Rushton is found during one of the rebellion's invasion.But Rushton seems to have lost his mind due to an overdose of drugs.And she recovers his soul when she enters Dragon's mind.
Single Book Publications: [2] [3] [4]
Year
