Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture, published by St. Martin's Press in 1991, is the first novel by Douglas Coupland. The novel popularized the term Generation X, which refers to Americans who reached adulthood in the late 1980s. It is a framed narrative, in which a group of youths exchange heartfelt stories about themselves and fantastical stories of their creation. Coupland released the similarly titled Generation A in September 2009.
This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
(June 2011)
Generation X is a framed narrative , like Chaucer 's The Canterbury Tales or The Decameron by Boccaccio . The framing story is that of three friends—Dag, Claire, and the narrator, Andy—living together in the Coachella Valley in California . The tales are told by the various characters in the novel, which is arranged into three parts. Each chapter is separately titled rather than numbered, with titles such as "I Am Not A Target Market" and "Adventure Without Risk Is Disneyland".
The locations of the novel was set circa 1990 Southern California in the then rapidly-growing and economic booming-turned-into-depressed communities of Palm Springs and the Inland Empire (California) region. Some characters were born and raised in L.A. and suburban Orange County, California .
Part One
The first part of the novel takes place over the course of a picnic. Andrew, Dag, and Claire tell each other stories—some personal, others imagined—over the course of the day. Through these tales, the reader glimpses the characters' motivations and personalities.
Part Two
The initial group of characters is expanded in this section, which introduces stories from additional characters: Claire's boyfriend Tobias, Claire's friend and Dag's love interest Elvissa, Andy's brother Tyler, and Andy's boss and neighbour and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. MacArthur. Each character represents a cultural type; Elvissa is constantly stuck in the past, Tobias is a " yuppie ", Tyler is a "global teen", and the neighbours represent members of an older generation.
The frame is muted here, as the narrative draws back to reveal more of the main characters, while allowing for other characters' stories to be heard.
Part Three
In this section, the novel continues to pull back its focus, as Andy and Claire travel away from California. Again, the frame is enlarged to include additional characters. Claire travels to New York, while Andy takes a dreaded trip to visit his family. Through the characters' personal and mental journeys, more tales are told and more of the characters' personal stories are revealed.
Characters
Andrew "Andy" Palmer
The book's narrator and main character. Andy is a bartender (a " McJob ," as he describes it). He is close friends with Dag and Claire. He is from Portland, Oregon .
Dagmar "Dag" Bellinghausen
A former office worker, he now works with Andy at the bar, and lives next door to him. He is obsessed with the possibility of a nuclear holocaust , and is prone to occasional erratic behavior. Unlike the other characters (who are American), he is a Canadian, from Toronto .
Claire Baxter
A friend of Andy and Dag that lives in a neighboring bungalow. She is from a large family connected by multiple divorces. She wants to live life as Andy and Dag are trying to, but struggles, partially because of her relationship with Tobias. She is from Los Angeles, California .
Tobias
Claire's boyfriend, a superficial yuppie. He finds the lifestyle of Andy, Dag, and Claire to be interesting, but is unable to commit to it. Neither Andy nor Dag likes him, and he is a foil to the other characters in the novel. Yuppies in the novel were thought to represent Orange County (where they grew up), the Inland Empire (where they live) and commuted to L.A. (where they work).
Elvissa
Claire's best friend, and Dag's love interest. She finds herself constantly trapped in the past, never quite catching up to the modern world. The character represented the poverty and desolation of the Mojave Desert and Sonoran Deserts of California, esp. Palm Springs when spring breakers once partied there and young gay couples moved in en masse during the 1980s.
Tyler
Andy's younger brother. As the youngest child in a large family, he is somewhat spoiled, but secretly wishes he could live as Andy does. He is a "global teen", later deemed by the media to be a member of Generation Y , and bears great similarity to the main character in Coupland's second novel, Shampoo Planet , that shares his name and mannerisms.
