Marvel Zombies is a five-issue limited series published from December 2005 to April 2006 by Marvel Comics. The series was written by Robert Kirkman with art by Sean Phillips and covers by Arthur Suydam. It was the first series in the Marvel Zombies series of related stories. The story is set in an alternate universe where the world's superhero population has been infected with a virus which turned them into zombies. The series was spun out of events of the Crossover story-arc of Ultimate Fantastic Four, where the zombie Reed Richards tricked his Ultimate counterpart into opening a portal to the zombie universe.
Plot
Within the Marvel Multiverse is an alternate Earth designated Earth 2149, which contains alternate versions of Marvel superheroes. The story begins as an unknown superhero from another dimension, brought by the "Hunger", crash lands before infecting the Avengers . The infection spreads via contact with the blood of the victim, usually through a bite by an infected individual. The zombie super heroes largely retain their intellect and personality, although they are consistently driven by the "Hunger" for human flesh.
The series begins where the Crossover story-arc ended, with Magneto destroying the cross-dimensional transporter after the Ultimate Fantastic Four and survivors escaped back to the Ultimate universe. After a battle with the zombies, Magneto learns that the Acolytes and Forge are still alive on Asteroid M . However, before he can reach them, he is attacked once again, killed and eaten by the zombies, though he manages to behead the zombified Hawkeye. The Silver Surfer arrives on Earth and informs the zombies that his master Galactus is en route to devour the planet. The zombies attack the Silver Surfer, who is overpowered and devoured by several of the former heroes: Colonel America , Iron Man, Giant-Man, Spider-Man, Luke Cage, the Hulk, and Wolverine. After acquiring a portion of the Power Cosmic, they slaughter most of the remaining zombies, intent on satiating their hunger.
The Acolytes return to Earth to find Magneto, but instead discover a still-living Black Panther. The Panther has escaped from the lab of the zombie Giant-Man, who has been keeping him alive as a food source. As a result of several feedings, the Panther is now missing an arm and a foot. As well as the Panther, zombie Wasp got into another argument with her husband when she discovered that Giant-Man was hoarding the Black Panther for food and is decapitated, although her head remains sentient. After observing the Wasp's head begging for flesh, he reasons that the hunger is more psychological than physical.
Meanwhile, the zombies have decided that the flesh of other zombies just isn't satisfying. Galactus then arrives on Earth and is attacked by the zombies, but he repels them easily. Giant-Man, Iron Man and Bruce Banner create a device that amplifies the powers they gained from the Silver Surfer, and together with Colonel America, Luke Cage, Spider-Man and Wolverine they are able to injure Galactus. The cosmic-powered zombies fight off zombified versions of several supervillains and then proceed to devour Galactus. Giant-Man, the Hulk, Iron Man, Luke Cage, Spider-Man and Wolverine are then infused with Galactus' power cosmic, becoming the collective Galacti.
Five years later, Black Panther, the Acolytes, and seemingly functioning Wasp return to Earth and find the planet empty. Unknown to them, the Zombie Galacti have taken their hunger to the stars.
Main article: Marvel Zombies (series)
An intercompany crossover between Marvel and Dynamite Entertainment , published from May to September 2007 provided information as to the source of the zombie infection in the five-part limited series titled Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness (Marvel) and Army of Darkness (Dynamite). In July of the same year, a one-shot graphic novel, Marvel Zombies: Dead Days provided more story details, and the zombies also appear in a three-part storyline in Black Panther vol. 3, #28 – 30, although they make their appearance in the last page of #27 first, and encounter the Earth-616 Fantastic Four.
A sequel to the original series, the five issue Marvel Zombies 2 , was published from October 2007 to February 2008, and Marvel Zombies 3 a four issue series, commenced October 2008. Marvel Zombies 4 was a four issue limited series published over the summer of 2009, and featured characters from Marvel's horror comics (Man-Thing, Morbius the Living Vampire, Werewolf by Night, and Mephisto among others). Marvel Zombies Return is a 5 issue mini-series begun in September 2009, and is a direct follow up sequel to Marvel Zombies 2 that wraps up the original zombie plotline. Several other sequels and spin-offs have been produced.
In 2006, the October issue of Wizard magazine featured a one-page Marvel Zombies comic by artist Sean Phillips called "Eat the Neighbors." It parodied Hostess Fruit Pie advertisements featured in Marvel titles in the 1970s which showcased Marvel superheroes defeating villains by offering them snacks. In this instance, Spider-Man, Captain America and Iron Man serve two children as "Hostees Meat Pies" after the children mistake them for legitimate superheroes.
Another humorous one-shot comic book was also published in 2007 featuring the alternate universe animal hero Spider-Ham and titled Ultimate Civil War Spider-Ham. Spider-Ham accidentally crosses over into Earth-2149 and becomes, as J. Michael Straczynski puts it, "Undead Ham". [1]
There are several trade paperbacks collecting the various stories:
Marvel Zombies (collects Marvel Zombies #1-5, hardcover, 136 pages, August 2006, ISBN 0-7851-2277-X )
Marvel Zombies (collects Marvel Zombies #1-5, softcover, 136 pages, October 2007, ISBN 978-0-7851-2014-8 )
Marvel Zomnibus (includes Marvel Zombies #1-5, 1200 pages, October 2012, ISBN 0-7851-4026-3 )
Other related collections include:
Merchandise
There is a range of supporting merchandise based on the characters. Diamond Select have produced Marvel Zombie Minimates , [2] action figures [3] and a number of mini busts. [4]
Wizkids Heroclix has had appearances of Spider-Man , Captain America, Hulk and Wolverine as Chase figures in the Supernova expansion. In the Mutations and Monsters set, there was an Iron Man, Giant-Man, Spider-Man and a Galactus Powered Wolverine. There was also a Janet Pym bystander token in the Mutations and Monsters set.
In The VS System TCG[ clarification needed ], the Marvel Zombies have 3 cards in the tournament Promo set Age of Apocalypse. If you won the tournament where they came from, you would get a copy of Spider-Man as a Zombie. If you come in second place, you would get a card of Captain America. All participants got a copy of the Marvel Zombies card. The zombies in the game had a unique theme of destroying themselves to activate an effect. At the end of the turn, they would return to play.
