The Pilgrimage (Portuguese: O Diário de Um Mago, "Diary of a Mage") is a 1987 novel by Brazilian novelist Paulo Coelho. A parable that explores the need to find one's own path. In the end, we discover that the extraordinary is always found in the ordinary and simple ways of everyday people. Part adventure story, part guide to self-discovery, this compelling tale delivers the perfect combination of enchantment and insight. It is a recollection of Paulo's experiences as he made his way across northern Spain on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela.
Plot summary
The story begins in 1986 when Coelho undertakes his initiation into the order Regnus Agnus Mundi (RAM) which he subsequently fails, he is then told that he must embark on a pilgrimage along the Way of St. James to find the sword that is the symbol of his acceptance into the ranks of RAM. He must do this to gain insight into the simplicity of life, the journey transforms him as he learns to understand the nature of truth through the simplicity of life.
He begins his journey with a guide, also a member of RAM, who goes by the alias Petrus. During the journey Petrus shows him meditation exercises and introduces him to some of the more down-to-earth elements of Western mystical thought and philosophy , and teaches him about love and its forms; agape , philia and eros .
Editions
The Pilgrimage has sold its rights to 38 languages : Albanian, Arabic, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese (Complex), Chinese (Simplified), Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, Galician, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Malayalam, Norwegian, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovakian, Slovenian, Spanish, Swedish and Turkish.
Mysticism as a Theme
There are described eleven RAM exercises/rituals in the book that the narrator of the book is taught in order to help him on his spiritual journey, they are presented in such order:
The Seed Exercise
