Complete Divine is a supplemental rulebook for the 3.5 edition of the Dungeons and Dragons fantasy role-playing game published by Wizards of the Coast. It replaces and expands upon earlier rulebooks entitled Masters of the Wild and Defenders of the Faith, as well as being a catchall for anything that doesn't fit into Complete Adventurer, Complete Arcane, Complete Warrior, or Complete Psionic.
Contents
It presents additional base classes, prestige classes, and feats. It also contains additional rules and character ideas based on belief and the afterlife, as well as a chapter on magic items based on the original D&D pantheon gods/goddesses .
New base classes
Shugenja
Updated from Oriental Adventures , the shugenja utilizes primal energies, and tapping into the earth to cast spells. It is a charisma based sorcerer-style divine casting class, with a spell list biased towards elemental spells.
Favored Soul
Updated from the Miniatures Handbook , the Favored Soul is a spontaneously casting divine class, with a couple of additional divine abilities closely tied to his or her deity.
Spirit Shaman
The class has a fairly narrow divine spell selection. The spirit shaman cast spells as sorcerers do, but they change their spell selection each day by sending their Spirit Guide into the spirit world. The shaman also has a special abilities that affect spirits (incorporeal undead, fey, elementals and creatures defined as spirits in other texts). The Spirit Guide is a purely mental/spiritual creature, incapable of affecting the world, though it does grant the spirit shaman the feat, "Alertness", as well as justifying certain class features. Ultimately, at 20th level, the spirit shaman becomes a spirit (fey) himself, much as a 20th level monk becomes an outsider.
New prestige class
These include church inquisitor, consecrated harrier, contemplative, divine oracle, holy liberator, hospitaler, pious templar, sacred exorcist, sacred fist and warpriest ( Defenders of the Faith ), blighter and geomancer ( Masters of the Wild ), temple raider of Olidammara ( Song and Silence ), void disciple ( Oriental Adventures ), ur-priests ( Book of Vile Darkness ), stormlord ( Faiths and Pantheons ), radiant servant of Pelor and shining blade of Heironeous .
In addition, there are several previously undescribed prestige classes.
Black flame zealot
A class that combines a hashisheen cult with the Arabic view of Zoroastrian fire worship, but one which isn't automatically evil.
Entropomancer
A class that worships oblivion and has the ability to summon fragments of a sphere of annihilation.
