War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning is a 2002 nonfiction book by Pulitzer Prize journalist Chris Hedges. In the book, Hedges draws on classical literature and his experiences as a war correspondent to argue that war seduces entire societies, creating fictions that the public believes and relies on to continue to support conflicts. He also describes how those who experience war may find it exhilarating and addictive. The book was a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award for Nonfiction and a Los Angeles Times Best Book of the Year, as well as a national bestseller. The book is available as an unabridged audio book, read by the author. The Hurt Locker, an Academy Award-winning film, opens with a quotation from the book: "The rush of battle is often a potent and lethal addiction, for war is a drug. " The full quote is found on page 3: "The rush of battle is a potent and often lethal addiction, for war is a drug, one I ingested for many years. " Hedges expressed criticism of the film in the "Hollywood and The War Machine" episode of the Al Jazeera English series "Empire".
1-58648-049-9
War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning ( ISBN 1586480499 ) is a 2002 nonfiction book by Pulitzer Prize journalist Chris Hedges . In the book, Hedges draws on classical literature and his experiences as a war correspondent to argue that war seduces entire societies, creating fictions that the public believes and relies on to continue to support conflicts. He also describes how those who experience war may find it exhilarating and addictive. The book was a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award for Nonfiction and a Los Angeles Times Best Book of the Year, as well as a national bestseller.
The book is available as an unabridged audio book, read by the author. The Hurt Locker , an Academy Award-winning film, opens with a quotation from the book: "The rush of battle is often a potent and lethal addiction, for war is a drug." The full quote is found on page 3: "The rush of battle is a potent and often lethal addiction, for war is a drug, one I ingested for many years." Hedges expressed criticism of the film in the "Hollywood and The War Machine" episode of the Al Jazeera English series "Empire".
"Interview: Chris Hedges" . Religion and Ethics Newsweekly. 2003-01-31. 
Charlie Rose interview at the time of the book's release
2004 lecture at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
This article about a book on military history is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
