Dead Man's Walk is a 1995 novel by Larry McMurtry. It is the third book published in the Lonesome Dove series but the first installment in terms of chronology. McMurtry wrote a fourth segment to the Lonesome Dove chronicle, Comanche Moon, which describes the events of the central characters' lives between Dead Man's Walk and Lonesome Dove. The second novel in the "Lonesome Dove" series was the 1993 sequel to the original, called Streets of Laredo.
Johnny Carthage ( Tim Blake Nelson ) – Texas Ranger
Colonel Caleb Cobb ( F. Murray Abraham ) – pirate who leads the Texas-Santa Fe expedition
Shadrach ( Harry Dean Stanton ) – Texas Ranger scout
Matilda Roberts ( Patricia Childress ) – whore, also known as "The Great Western"
Captain Salazar ( Edward James Olmos ) – Mexican Army captain who takes the Texas prisoners in New Mexico
Major Laroche ( Joaquim de Almeida ) – Frenchman in the Mexican Army, who takes the prisoners to the leper colony
Buffalo Hump ( Eric Schweig ) – a notorious Comanche war chief and father of Blue Duck
Kicking Wolf (Jonathan Joss) – Comanche warrior, accomplished horse thief
Clara Forsythe ( Jennifer Garner ) – young lady in a general store in Austin, who 'smites' Gus
Lady Lucinda Carey (Haviland Morris) – Scottish nobility, leper
Willy (Adam Lamberg) – Lady Carey's son
Mrs. Chubb – Lady Carey's attendant
Emerald (Akosua Busia) – Lady Carey's African attendant
Maggie Tilton (Gretchen Mol) – a prostitute who loves Woodrow F. Call and the mother of his illegitimate son Newt.
Allusions/references to actual history, geography and current science
Although the exact time frame of the story is not given, the historical context of the events occurring sometime in the early 1840s is authentic. The Republic of Texas did indeed attempt to annex part of New Mexico, in what historians refer to as the Santa Fe Expedition . As seen in this story, it was a failure. The incident involving the drawing of beans to decide who would be spared, however, is actually loosely based on the fate of the so-called Mier Expedition prisoners, in which the historical Bigfoot Wallace was, in fact, a participant. Bigfoot Wallace , though, died over 50 years later in 1899, unlike this fictional story's character of the same name.
The characters of the novel briefly encounter an individual who identifies himself as "Charlie Goodnight," who warns them against continuing their expedition based on his superior knowledge of the terrain and geography. The non-fictional Charles Goodnight was one of the most famous cattle ranchers in Texas history and is sometimes called "the father of the Texas Panhandle ." The historical Charles Goodnight, however, was a young boy at the time of the events portrayed in the novel, having been born in 1836.
Major Randall Chevallie, who appears in the first part of the novel, may be loosely based upon Major Michael Chevallie , an actual leader of the Texas Rangers who led "Chevallie's Battalion " in the Mexican-American War and who participated in the Battle of Monterrey . Although the book suggests the fictional Major Chevallie died in San Antonio, Texas shortly after the events recounted in the early part of the novel, in actuality, the historical Major Chevallie lived until 1852 and died in Stockton, California .
The two Indian scalpers who appear in the book -- James Kirker and John Glanton -- are likewise actual historical figures. John Glanton is perhaps best known for his central role in Cormac McCarthy 's own famous American novel about the Indian scalping trade, Blood Meridian .
In her attempt to unnerve the Comanches by playing to their superstitions, Lady Carey sings Verdi arias. She also claims to have studied singing under Verdi. In 1841, Verdi was 28, and his first major success, Nabucco , was a year in the future. The author is apparently stretching the truth to make the clever ending possible.
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
It was later made into a miniseries starring David Arquette as Augustus McCrae and Jonny Lee Miller as Woodrow F. Call.
