Among the Impostors is a 2001 book by Margaret Peterson Haddix, about a time in which drastic measures have been taken to quell overpopulation. It is the second of seven novels in the Shadow Children series.
Plot summary
The general plot revolves around an allegedly overpopulated world and the Government’s Procrustean attempts to arrest the symptoms of population growth and scarcity amongst the Earth's resources. In this turmoil, the democratic government has been overthrown and a totalitarian Government has been put in its place. Laws established by the regime prohibit a family from having more than two children (any more will be hanged).
Luke Garner, an illegal third child living with a fake ID , is going by the alias Lee Grant at the Hendricks School for Boys. Lee Grant was killed while skiing down a mountain so no one knows that he was gone except for his family. He is at first confused and paranoid, as well as treated brutally by his roommates, mainly the boy he comes to call "Jackal Boy". Eventually, Luke begins sneaking out of the school to do things, and tries to plant his own garden in the woods. This brings him great happiness and a sense that he belongs. When his garden is trampled, he realizes that other people are going outside, including Jackal Boy.
He reveals himself to them, finding out that they are other illegals as well. The leader, Scott Renault (whose real name is Jason Barstow) otherwise known as Jackal Boy, is outwardly a huge admirer of Jen Talbot, Luke's only friend who died at a rally for third children's rights . Luke is accepted into Jason's group, but is still too frightened to give his real name.
He learns more and more about Hendricks School, but never learns what his schedule is until he is asked about "finals" by Jason. He then is told that he has to take his semester final tests, and that his results will be sent to his fake parents, the Grants, who happen to be Barons, and one of the richest and most powerful people in the country. When awoken one night, he realizes Jason is gone, and Luke while looking for him happens to overhear a phone conversation of Jason's, where he is talking to a Population Police officer.
Luke finally realizes Jason is actually a Population Police operative trying to get the real identities of illegals and attacks him with a history book, causing the phone to get disconnected, and knocks Jason out when Jason's head hits the stairs. He comes up with a cover story for the Population Police officer at the other end and gets Jason down to the nurse's office. He calls Mr. Talbot, a double agent working with Population Police, and convinces him to come to Hendricks. When another officer comes, Mr. Talbot convinces them that Jason is lying about the third children and has Jason arrested. Luke is later given the choice to leave the school, but he decides to stay at Hendricks and help the other third children.
Luke Garner /Lee Grant
Jackal boy (Jason)
Mr.Talbot (The guy in "Among The Hidden" who was the father of Jen Talbot. She made a rally and invited other shadow children)
Nina
