Ramona Forever is a humorous children's novel written by Beverly Cleary. The seventh book in the Ramona Quimby series, it continues the story of Ramona, her sister Beezus, and their family. Ramona and Beezus are finally old enough to stay home together, and the sisters work hard to get along. Mrs. Quimby is pregnant, and Aunt Bea gets engaged, in a book that sees Ramona coping with growing up. Ramona Forever was originally published in 1984.
Plot summary
Ramona Quimby is growing up. She and Beezus manage to convince their parents to let them stay home alone together after school for one week to see how it goes. One day, Ramona and Beezus get into a fight about Beezus's newly found skin problems. The next day, the sisters find their cat, Picky-picky, dead in the basement. They forgive each other and handle the funeral and burial themselves, and their parents decide the girls are responsible enough to take care of themselves. Ramona is especially happy not to have to go to the Kemp's after school any more because Howie's rich Uncle Hobart has arrived from Saudi Arabia. He's the kind of man who thinks it's funny to tease kids, and Ramona doesn't like him.
There are more changes coming for the Quimbys. Mr. Quimby is almost finished with college, and everyone hopes he'll get a teaching job in the area. It's especially important because Mrs. Quimby is expecting another baby, and she plans on staying home to take care of it. Beezus thinks it will be wonderful to have a baby around to take care of, but Ramona realizes she won't be the littlest any more. She's not sure how she feels about being the middle child.
Before she gets a chance to find out, something else changes: Aunt Bea and Howie's Uncle Hobart get engaged. Beezus and Ramona are to be maids of honor in their wedding. They only have two weeks to plan the wedding, though, and by the time the wedding day arrives everyone in the neighborhood has become involved. By the time baby Roberta arrives, Ramona realizes, along with her family, that "She was winning at growing up." [1]
Critical reception
Kirkus Reviews gave Ramona Forever a starred review, for "books of remarkable merit", saying, "It's a measure of Cleary's talent and acumen that the Quimbys are as credible in the mid-1980s as they were in the mid-1950s." [2]
Beatrice Quimby/Beezus - Ramona's older sister who is in the seventh grade.
Ramona Quimby - The novel's protagonist.
Mrs.Quimby- Ramona and Beezus's mother Dorothy.
Mr.Quimby- Ramona and Beezus's father Robert.
Howard *Howie* Kemp- Ramona's friend since nursery school in Beezus and Ramona.
Aunt Beatrice- The girls' aunt and Dorothy's sister. First introduced in Beezus and Ramona . A third grade teacher.
Hobart Kemp- Howie's rich uncle who marries Aunt Beatrice and become the girls' uncle in the ninth chapter.
Willa Jean- Howie's messy little sister in nursery school.
Picky Picky- The Qumby's old yellow cat who died at age of 12 in the fourth chapter.
Roberta Day Quimby- Ramona and Beezus's new little sister, born in the last chapter.
Adaptations, editions
Ramona and Beezus : A movie starring Joey King as Ramona and Selena Gomez as Beezus. The movie was released on July 23, 2010. [3] Although the film jumps from book to book, the plot mainly focuses on the seventh book in the series, Ramona Forever.
Audio Formats: Ramona Forever is available in cassette, CD and eAudiobook from Random House/Listening Library; VHs tape from Atlantis Films/Ramona Productions; [4]
Print/English: Braille available from Dell, large print books through Dell, and e-Books through HarperCollins; [4]
Print/Worldwide: As of 2010, 109 editions of Ramona Forever had been published in 9 languages. [5]
