The Mysteries of Harris Burdick is a 1984 picture book by the American author Chris Van Allsburg consisting of a series of seemingly unrelated, highly detailed images in Van Allsburg's distinctive style. Each image is accompanied by a title and a single line of text, which compel readers to create their own stories. Many famous writers have tried to put their own little twists on the pictures. The book is available in a Portfolio Edition which includes another image/caption pair from the story "Missing in Venice. " An additional drawing signed by Chris Van Allsburg and dated 1985 was recently on view at Books of Wonder children's bookstore in New York City. It is titled "What Happened to Harris Burdick?" and depicts how Harris Burdick may have disappeared. It depicted a car sinking in a lake, its driver door open, and a fedora hat floating on the water. There were several unusual elements in the background, including an object resembling a UFO among the clouds. In 2011 a new book titled "The Chronicles of Harris Burdick" was published, featuring stories by high profile writers like Stephen King and Louis Sachar, inspired by the illustrations in the original "The Mysteries of Harris Burdick" book.
The Polar Express
The Mysteries of Harris Burdick is a 1984 picture book by the American author Chris Van Allsburg consisting of a series of seemingly unrelated, highly detailed images in Van Allsburg's distinctive style. Each image is accompanied by a title and a single line of text, which compel readers to create their own stories. Many famous writers have tried to put their own little twists on the pictures. [1]
The book is available in a Portfolio Edition which includes another image/caption pair from the story "Missing in Venice."
An additional drawing signed by Chris Van Allsburg and dated 1985 is titled "What Happened to Harris Burdick?" It can be seen at https://secure.flickr.com/photos/texasadam/5047537540/ .
In 2011 a new book titled "The Chronicles of Harris Burdick" was published, featuring stories by high profile writers like Stephen King and Louis Sachar , inspired by the illustrations in the original "The Mysteries of Harris Burdick" book. [2]
Contents
