Weslandia is a novel by Newbery Medal winner Paul Fleischman, with illustrations by Kevin Hawkes. It was published in 1999 by Candlewick Press.
Plot overview
The story follows a protagonist, Wesley, in the creation of an eponymous micro-nation in his parents' backyard. His efforts are successful, and instead of being a social outcast, he gains a group of followers made up of his former grade-school tormentors.
When Wesley, a somewhat eccentric boy with no friends, discovers a mysterious plant magically growing in his parents' backyard, he cultivates the plant over his summer vacation. The plant, which he names "swist", provides him with a food source, and allows him to build shelter, tools, and even create his own entertainment and inspires Wesley to create his own writing system. Wesley's resourcefulness and meticulous research eventually allow to him the basis of his own civilization which he names "Weslandia."
Reception
The overarching theme of the story is that unique personalities can lead to innovation and success, demonstrating the problem of groupthink in adolescent peer relationships and potentially encouraging social outcasts to follow their own path.[ citation needed ]
There are also certain higher-level, if simplistic, social critiques built into the story. One illustration shows Wesley's suburban neighborhood from above, which basically shows a landscape of identical houses—with the only variation being "garage on the left or garage on the right." This architectural blandness is a mirror of the groupthink that initially leads Wesley's classmates to bully him for being unusual, but it's perpetrated by home-owning adults instead, who are unable or afraid to think outside the box .[ citation needed ]
The plant that magically sprouts in the protagonist's backyard allows him to create food, shelter, and entertainment. This could be considered as a lesson on environmentalism and self-sufficiency. One of Wesley's neighbors asks him if the newly-sprouted plant is a tomato, bean, or brussel sprout—because those are the only plants that the neighbor could fathom growing in a garden. A lot of teachers use this book to teach their students about creating their own civilization and also sustainability.[ citation needed ]
