Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House is a 1946 comedy novel written by Eric Hodgins and illustrated by William Steig, describing the vicissitudes of buying a home in the country. It originally appeared as a short story in the April 1946 issue of Fortune magazine. It was adapted as a movie of the same name, released in 1948, which starred Cary Grant, Myrna Loy, and Melvyn Douglas. Later two radio adaptations were also performed, with Grant in the leading role.
This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
(October 2008)
Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House
1st edition cover
ISBN
NA
Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House is a 1946 comedy novel written by Eric Hodgins and illustrated by William Steig , describing the vicissitudes of buying a home in the country. It originally appeared as a short story called "Mr. Blandings Builds His Castle" in the April 1946 issue of Fortune magazine.
It was adapted as a movie of the same name , released in 1948, which starred Cary Grant , Myrna Loy , and Melvyn Douglas . Later two radio adaptations were also performed, with Grant in the leading role.
Contents
Plot summary
The book begins in fictional Landsdale County, Connecticut, where Jim and Muriel Blandings are being shown an old farmhouse by a real estate agent. Blandings, a successful New York advertising executive, and his wife want to leave their tiny Midtown apartment, where they live with their two daughters. They fantasize that the farmhouse will meet their needs. After some negotiation, they buy the house.
They soon learn that the house is structurally unsound and must be torn down. They design the perfect home in the country, imagining an idyll, but they are quickly beset by construction troubles, temperamental workmen, skyrocketing bills, threatening lawyers, and difficult neighbors. The Blandings' dream house soon threatens to be the nightmare that undoes them.
Hodgins wrote a sequel, Blandings Way , published in 1950.
The real house
The short story and novel were based on the author Eric Hodgins's experience with buying property and building a house in the Merryall area of the town of New Milford , Connecticut . The real house was completed in 1939, but was so expensive — his original budget was $11,000 but the final cost was about $56,000 — that Hodgins was forced to sell it. It was sold in 1945 for $38,000 to John Allard, a retired Air Force general. Hodgins unsuccessfully tried to buy the house back after receiving $200,000 in movie rights to the book. In 1953, the house was sold to Ralph Gulliver, a fuel oil dealer in New Milford, who gave it to his son, Jack, in 1972. [1] In 1980, the house was sold to the author and composer Stephen Citron and his wife, the biographer and novelist Anne Edwards . [2] In 2004, the house was sold for $1.2 million.
Unlike in the book and the movie, Hodgins did not tear down the old farmhouse, but built the new house next to it. The farmhouse remained until at least the 1970s. [1]
Mr. James Blandings – advertising executive
Mrs. Muriel Blandings – his wife
Mr. William "Bill" Cole – the Blandings' lawyer and friend
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
In addition to the 1948 film, the novel was adapted as two radio plays, both starring Cary Grant. It was also the basis of both the 1986 film The Money Pit , starring Tom Hanks alongside Shelley Long , and the 2007 film Are We Done Yet?
