Mistborn: The Final Empire is the first novel of Brandon Sanderson's Mistborn trilogy. It was followed by Mistborn: The Well of Ascension. The third title in the trilogy, Mistborn: The Hero of Ages, was released on October 14, 2008.
Plot summary
When the prophesied hero fails, a volcanic Final Empire of red skies and constant ashfall rises, for a thousand years in which most humans are enslaved skaa workers living in misery and fear, where the Lord Ruler is the divinely invincible "Sliver of Infinity" of absolute power and terror. In the brutal Pits of Hathsin where atium, the most valuable metal in the world is mined, an imprisoned scarred half-skaa thief named Kelsier discovers his Mistborn powers, escapes and becomes a legend, the only Survivor of the Pits of Hathsin. A brilliant mastermind now empowered with new weapons and a natural leader, he and his crew's talents are utilized for the ultimate caper, to topple the Final Empire by stealing its treasury and collapsing its economy, while setting up the Lord Ruler as the mark.
Night in the Empire is empty of skaa, for they have been indoctrinated in the Lord Ruler's religion to fear almost everything and the nightly mists most of all. In the Empire are shattered kingdoms, but above, within and around everything were the mists, more constant and powerful than sun or storms, always changing but eternal. The Mistborn and nobility see the mists without superstitions and ignore it, blind to its aspects.
In Luthadel, the capital city of the Final Empire, a scrawny street urchin named Vin is recruited by Kelsier's crew. Kelsier plans to steal the rumored atium stash from the Lord Ruler’s treasury and to free the oppressed skaa in the process. When Vin learns that she is a Mistborn – a powerful Allomancer who can burn ingested metals to gain special abilities like Kelsier, she becomes part of this scheme. Rare among the Great Houses of the nobility, almost unheard of in Skaa peasantry, Kelsier's crew now has two Mistborn. The other members in the crew are Mistings , who have one specific power by "burning" its Allomantic metal. Ham, a Thug that burns pewter for strength, Breeze, a Soother that burns brass for emotional influence, Clubs, a Smoker that burns Copper to shield Allomantic detection, Spook, a Tineye that burns tin for enhanced vision – and Dockson who has no Misting abilities but is a great administrator. Kelsier’s brother Marsh infiltrates the Steel Ministry and Vin masquerades as Valette, a minor noble and cousin of Lord Renoux, to spy out the alliances and secrets of the nobility. Vin falls in love with Elend Venture, son of Lord Venture and heir to House Venture.
Kelsier manages to start a House War by assassinating powerful nobles, and Dockson, Ham and Breeze manage to recruit some seven thousand soldiers with which to attack the Luthadel garrison. However, Yeden, the man who originally hired the crew for the job, makes a foolish move leaving the army exposed and majority of it gets slaughtered. The rest covertly move to Luthadel. House Renoux, the front for getting weapons, is compromised and Lord Renoux with his servants are to be executed. Kelsier and some of the remaining soldiers fight to save them, managing to free most of them. Kelsier is killed by the Lord Ruler in the rescue attempt, taking a Steel Inquisitor with him. Lord Renoux, who turns out to be a Kandra, a creature capable of changing its body-shape, consumes Kelsier’s body and is able to appear as an apparition to the Skaa. The whole population of Luthadel rises and defeats the garrison and the remaining noble houses.
Meanwhile, Vin, armed with the eleventh metal, malatium, goes to the imperial palace, Kredik Shaw, to kill the Lord Ruler. She is captured by Kar, a brutal Steel Inquisitor and left in a cell to be tortured. Sazed, her faithful Terrisman servant, comes to her rescue. Being a Feruchemist , he manages to break his chains by strength stored in a piece of metal in his stomach, and then helps Vin to recover her possessions and a vial of metals. Vin attacks the Lord Ruler and Marsh, thought to be dead by the crew, rushes to aid her as a Steel Inquisitor. In a fierce fight Vin is almost destroyed by the Lord Ruler, but unexpectedly gains more Allomantic strength by inhaling the mists and manages to separate the Lord Ruler, revealed to be an Allomancer and Feruchemist, from his Feruchemical bracelets that provide him with constant youth, thus making him age rapidly. Vin then rams a spear through the Lord Ruler’s heart. The Final Empire collapses with Elend set up as the new king for a new nation.
Characters
Vin - a half-skaa street urchin who possesses the power of a Mistborn. Primary protagonist.
Kelsier - the Survivor of Hathsin, and one of the greatest Mistborn Allomancers of all time. He escaped from the Pits of Hathsin where he had been forced to work as a slave, and wandered the world. After being contacted by a skaa hoping for rebellion, Kelsier strikes up his loyal crew with a new contract: the fall of the Final Empire. Secondary protagonist - the story is partly told from his point of view.
Dockson, or "Dox" - Kelsier's long-time friend and crewmember. He is not an Allomancer, but keeps the crew operational by means of his organizational and administrative abilities.
Hammond, or "Ham" - a member of Kelsier's crew, and a Pewterarm or Thug. Ham enjoys philosophical bouts, especially with Breeze.
Ladrian, or "Breeze" - a member of Kelsier's crew, and a Soother. Breeze likes his wine, almost as much as he likes himself.
Cladent, or "Clubs" - a member of Kelsier's crew. He is a Coppercloud or Smoker, and he along with the rest of his apprentices are able to shield their hideouts from the Ministry's Allomancers.
Lestibournes, or "Spook" - Clubs' nephew, one of his apprentices, and a Tineye. Born in the east, speaks with a strange Eastern slang. To avoid connection and ultimately execution by Inquisitors, any Skaa children with Allomantic abilities were abandoned, sold or killed by their families as Inquisitors or Obligators did not care about skaa adults or urchins that died. Clubs saved Spook, just as his father was about to kill him. Kelsier said Lestibournes was too difficult and named him "Spook". In Eastern street slang, Lestibournes is "Lefting I'm born", for "I've been abandoned".
Lord Ruler - The ruler and "God" of the Final Empire. Nobody knows who he is or where he came from. All that is known is that since his Ascension, the Deepness was driven back and the world has lost hope.
Marsh - Kelsier's brother and a Seeker. He is willing to take down the Final Empire, no matter the cost.
Sazed - A Terrisman from the Northern Dominance of Terris. He is a Keeper, and specializes in religion. Using his Feruchemy , he stores information in his copperminds.
Elend - A nobleman, and son of Straff Venture. He is heir to the Venture House, though not by the choice of either him or his father. All Elend wants to do is read and see Vin.
Mare - Kelsier's wife. Some years before the novel opens, she and Kelsier were captured by the Lord Ruler while working a job and imprisoned at the Pits of Hathsin. After a year, she was beaten to death by the taskmasters and he escaped.
Reception
The Washington Post writes Sanderson's characters aren't particularly well-developed, and the allomancy sometimes feels a little like a video game trick (press X-Y-X-X to burn steel!). But he has created a fascinating world here, one that deserves a sequel. [1]
Forbes magazine praises all of the books in the Mistborn series saying "The narrative is crafted with such bloody precision, it’s nearly impossible to put the books down." [2]
