Extinctioners is a science fiction, action and adventure comic book created, written and drawn by Shawntae Howard that features a superhero theme, but uses anthropomorphic animals as its main characters.
6 External links
Plot and setting
Extinctioners follows a group of characters who learn they are hybrids, a humanoid animal possessing special powers which augment some species characteristic, and that their creators -- humans -- are on their way back to their planet with plans of taking over.
The humanoid animals on the planet Alden, or humanimals, were genetic constructs created by humans for the purpose of avoiding having animals become extinct on an overpopulated Earth, with the idea that more humanoid animals would be able to better adapt to the changing reduction to their natural environments and increased pollution. During a global war, the humans discovered a new fresh planet though a wormhole that would be habitable for mankind. Since the humans thought it would be too risky for themselves to colonize the planet, they sent a seeding of humanimals with human trainers to the planet to terraform it, build cities and set up social organizations, so that upon the human's arrival the transition to the new planet would go smoothly. However, a miscalculation in the wormhole's temporal properties caused the humans to lose contact with their humanimal constructs, leaving them alone on the planet. Without direct guidance, the humanimals developed on their own and eventually developed a social structure suitable for their vastly diverse races.
With the memory of mankind vague in the social conscious, humans - or The Makers as they are known - have been elevated to an almost deity status among many of the humanimal populous. The humans, however, are still on their way to Alden and the Extinctioners are the only ones that know that they are coming, due to less than positive encounters with a small faction of humans. What the humans' ultimate plans for Alden and its humanimal population are has yet to be revealed.
Main article: List of Extinctioners characters
After the first six issues of Extinctioners, two groups were formed; The Extinctioners and the Solar Foxes. In the beginning, the two teams are able to fight off a human and humanimal plot to shanghai hybrids and brainwash them into becoming soldiers for the human conquest.
