On Stranger Tides is a 1987 historical fantasy novel written by Tim Powers. It was nominated for the World Fantasy Award for Best Novel, and placed second in the annual Locus poll for best fantasy novel. The story was also the inspiration for the Monkey Island video game series by LucasArts and for the fourth installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series, Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.
Plot summary
This book follows the exploits of John "Jack Shandy" Chandagnac, who travels to the new world after the death of his puppeteer father to confront his uncle, who apparently has made off with the family inheritance. During the voyage, he gets to know a woman named Beth Hurwood and her father Benjamin Hurwood, an Oxford professor. Before they arrive, their ship is waylaid by pirates and, with the help of the professor and his assistant, the captain is killed and Chandagnac is forced to join the pirate crew. The reader discovers a sinister plot being concocted by the professor involving his dead wife, his living daughter, the Fountain of Youth , and Blackbeard . Chandagnac, now known as "Jack Shandy", must put a stop to these plans and save Beth Hurwood.
Reception
Orson Scott Card , declaring that the novel "is as good as storytelling ever gets," reported that "Powers writes in a clean, elegant style that illuminates without slowing down the tale. The story promises marvels and horrors, and delivers them all." [4] David Langford wrote that On Stranger Tides "immediately hooks you and drags you along in sympathy with one central character's appalling misfortunes on the Spanish Main, [and] escalates from there to closing mega-thrills so determinedly spiced that your palate is left almost jaded." [5]
Jack Adrian, saying that "Tim Powers has further refertilized the Sabatini swashbuckler," described the novel as a skillful blend of "high seas adventure with sorcery and black magic." [6]
Influence on other works
Kim Newman based the name of a vampire in his Anno Dracula series on the main character of On Stranger Tides. [7]
Although Ron Gilbert has been widely quoted that the Monkey Island series of adventure games was inspired by Disneyland 's Pirates of the Caribbean ride , he stated in a blog that the ride was mainly his inspiration for the ambience of the series, while his true inspiration was On Stranger Tides. [8]
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
On September 11, 2009, Walt Disney Pictures announced that the fourth installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean series would be titled Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides . The announcement had fueled speculation that the film would follow the plot of the novel, since Powers sold the film rights for the novel to Disney. [9] It was also speculated that Jack Sparrow would replace Jack Shandy as the story's protagonist. Powers stated that the Fountain of Youth would definitely be in the film, but Sparrow and Shandy are "totally different characters", and that Hector Barbossa and Blackbeard might overlap. [3]
In January 2010, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 20, 2011. On March 22, 2010, Jerry Bruckheimer confirmed that both Barbossa and Blackbeard would be in the film, with Blackbeard as the villain. Ian McShane portrayed Blackbeard and Penélope Cruz played his daughter, Angelica, a character that is loosely based on Beth Hurwood from the novel. [10]
