Alone Against Tomorrow: Stories of Alienation in Speculative Fiction is a collection of short stories by author Harlan Ellison. Published in the United States in 1971, as a ten year retrospective of Ellison's short stories, it includes some of his most famous work. It was later published in the UK in two volumes as All the Sounds of Fear in 1973 and The Time of the Eye in 1974 (the 1974 volume only containing a new introduction). All of the stories in this collection center around isolation and alienation, and were selected from previous short story collections to fit this theme. The book was dedicated to, among others, four student protesters who were killed in the Kent State shootings of 1970. This dedication prompted a response from a reader calling the students "hooligans" who were "Communist-led radical revolutionaries and anarchists, and deserved to be shot". This letter was reprinted in the introduction to Ellison's subsequent 1974 short story collection Approaching Oblivion. Ellison states that this letter frightened him and was one of the things that led him to change that collection from a call to action to a cry of frustration and disillusionment.
Pages
277 pp
Alone Against Tomorrow: Stories of Alienation in Speculative Fiction is a collection of short stories by author Harlan Ellison . Published in the United States in 1971, as a ten-year retrospective of Ellison's short stories, it includes some of his most famous work. It was later published in the UK in two volumes as All the Sounds of Fear in 1973 and The Time of the Eye in 1974 (the 1974 volume only containing a new introduction). All of the stories in this collection center around isolation and alienation, and were selected from previous short story collections to fit this theme.
The book was dedicated to, among others, four student protesters who were killed in the Kent State shootings of 1970. This dedication prompted a response from a reader calling the students "hooligans" who were "Communist-led radical revolutionaries and anarchists, and deserved to be shot". [1] This letter was reprinted in the introduction to Ellison's subsequent 1974 short story collection Approaching Oblivion . Ellison states that this letter frightened him and was one of the things that led him to change that collection from a call to action to a cry of frustration and disillusionment.
